Some horses have special gaits, which are more comfortable for the rider than walk, trot or gallop. Now, a study by an international research team under the direction of the Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research (IZW) in Berlin revealed that these gaited horses most likely originated in the 9th century medieval England. From there they were brought to Iceland by the Vikings and later spread all over Europe and Asia. These findings were published in the current issue of the journal "Current Biology."

Walk, trot and gallop are the gaits which all horses can master. However, riders who want to sit in their saddle more comfortably while still making good time on long journeys would benefit from choosing gaited horses. They are able to perform special gaits, like the ambling or pacing, which are typical for Icelandic horses and allow for a smoother ride. Responsible for this ability is a mutation in the DMRT3 gene, which was recently shown by a study with over 4,000 horses from different breeds. To investigate the history of gaited horses the scientist analysed this mutation in the genome of 90 horses from the Copper Age (6000 BC) to the Middle Ages (11th century). They detected the mutation in samples of two English horses from 850 -- 900 AD and more frequently in Icelandic horses dating to the 9th -- 11th century. Most likely the first gaited horses appeared in medieval England and were then transported to Iceland by the Vikings. Horses have existed in Iceland since 870 BC. In contrast, no European (Scandinavia included) or Asian horse of the same period carrying the mutation for the alternative gaits was found.

It is improbable that the English and Icelandic gaited horse populations developed independently from each other in such a short time. "It is much more likely, that the first horses ever imported to Iceland already carried the mutation for alternative gaits. The Vikings recognised the value of the gaited horses and preferentially selected for this trait -- thereby laying the foundation for the worldwide distribution," explains Arne Ludwig, geneticist at the IZW. Historic sagas also suggest that Icelandic horses exhibited the ability for alternative gaits at a very early stage. Although the origin of the Icelandic horse is not fully resolved, the general assumption is that they came to the island together with the Vikings. However, since the mutation was not found in Scandinavian horses of the 9th century, horses from other regions must have been brought to Iceland as well.

Historic records report that Vikings were repeatedly pillaging on the British Isles and conquered the region of today's Yorkshire -- precisely the region the two historic gaited horses originated from. "Taking that into account our results suggest that Vikings first encountered gaited horses on the British Isles and transported them to Iceland," explains Saskia Wutke, PhD student at the IZW and first lead author of the study. The high frequency of the mutation for gaitedness in the early Icelandic horses indicates that the Icelandic settlers preferably bred gaited horses -- apparently the comfortable gaits proved to be particularly suitable for long distance travel through rough terrain.

Story Source:

Materials provided by Forschungsverbund Berlin e.V. (FVB). Note: Content may be edited for style and length.

Journal Reference:

Saskia Wutke, Leif Andersson, Norbert Benecke, Edson Sandoval-Castellanos, Javier Gonzalez, Jón Hallsteinn Hallsson, Lembi Lõugas, Ola Magnell, Arturo Morales-Muniz, Ludovic Orlando, Albína Hulda Pálsdóttir, Monika Reissmann, Mariana B. Muñoz-Rodríguez, Matej Ruttkay, Alexandra Trinks, Michael Hofreiter, Arne Ludwig. The origin of ambling horses. Current Biology, 2016; 26 (15): R697 DOI: 10.1016/j.cub.2016.07.001



This is a good article. Follow the link for more information.
Tennessee Walking Horse
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Tennessee Walking Horse
Tennessee Walking Horse2.jpg
Flat-shod Tennessee Walking Horse
Other names	Tennessee Walker
Walking Horse
Walker
TWH
Country of origin	Tennessee, USA
Traits
Weight	
900 to 1,200 pounds (410 to 540 kg)
Height	
14.3 to 17 hands (59 to 68 inches, 150 to 173 cm)
Color	Any color permissible
Distinguishing features	Unique running-walk, tall, long neck; calm disposition; long, straight head
Breed standards
Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders' and Exhibitors' Association
National Walking Horse Association
Equus ferus caballus
The Tennessee Walking Horse or Tennessee Walker is a breed of gaited horse known for its unique four-beat running-walk and flashy movement. It was originally developed in the southern United States for use on farms and plantations. It is a popular riding horse due to its calm disposition, smooth gaits and sure-footedness. The Tennessee Walking Horse is often seen in the show ring, but is also popular as a pleasure and trail riding horse using both English and Western equipment. Tennessee Walkers are also seen in movies, television shows and other performances.

The breed was developed beginning in the late 18th century when Narragansett Pacers and Canadian Pacers from the eastern United States were crossed with gaited Spanish Mustangs from Texas. Other breeds were later added, and in 1886 a foal named Black Allan was born. He is now considered the foundation sire of the breed. In 1935 the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders' Association was formed, and it closed the studbook in 1947. In 1939, the first Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration was held.

In the early 21st century, this annual event has attracted considerable attention and controversy, because of efforts to prevent abuse of horses that was practiced to enhance their performance in the show ring.

The two basic categories of Tennessee Walking Horse show competition are called "flat-shod" and "performance", distinguished by desired leg action. Flat-shod horses, wearing regular horseshoes, exhibit less exaggerated movement. Performance horses are shod with built-up pads or "stacks", along with other weighted action devices, creating the so-called "Big Lick" style. The United States Equestrian Federation and some breed organizations now prohibit the use of stacks and action devices at shows they sanction.

In addition, the Tennessee Walking Horse is the breed most affected by the Horse Protection Act of 1970. It prohibits the practice of soring, abusive practices which were used to enhance the Big Lick movement prized in the show ring. Despite the law, some horses are still being abused. The controversy over continuing soring practices has led to a split within the breed community, criminal charges against a number of individuals, and the creation of several separate breed organizations.

Contents 
1	Breed characteristics
2	History
3	Uses
4	Horse shows
4.1	Horse Protection Act
4.2	Show rules and organizations
5	Footnotes
6	Further reading
7	External links
Breed characteristics

Exhibiting the typical long neck, sloping shoulder, and correct head
The modern Tennessee Walking Horse is described as "refined and elegant, yet solidly built".[1] It is a tall horse with a long neck. The head is well-defined, with small, well-placed ears. The breed averages 14.3 to 17 hands (59 to 68 inches, 150 to 173 cm) high and 900 to 1,200 pounds (410 to 540 kg). The shoulders and hip are long and sloping, with a short back and strong coupling.[2][3] The hindquarters are of "moderate thickness and depth", well-muscled, and it is acceptable for the hind legs to be slightly over-angulated, cow-hocked or sickle-hocked.[4]

They are found in all solid colors, and several pinto patterns.[5] Common colors such as bay, black and chestnut are found, as are colors caused by dilution genes such as the dun, champagne, cream and silver dapple genes. Pinto patterns include overo, sabino and tobiano.[6]

The Tennessee Walking Horse has a reputation for having a calm disposition and a naturally smooth riding gait.[3] While the horses are famous for flashy movement, they are popular for trail and pleasure riding as well as show.[7]

The Tennessee Walking Horse is best known for its running-walk. This is a four-beat gait with the same footfall pattern as a regular, or flat, walk, but significantly faster. While a horse performing a flat walk moves at 4 to 8 miles per hour (6.4 to 12.9 kilometres per hour), the running walk allows the same horse to travel at 10 to 20 miles per hour (16 to 32 kilometres per hour). In the running walk, the horse's rear feet overstep the prints of its front feet by 6 to 18 inches (15 to 46 centimetres), with a longer overstep being more prized in the Tennessee Walking Horse breed. While performing the running walk, the horse nods its head in rhythm with its gait.[8] Besides the flat and running walks, the third main gait performed by Tennessee Walking Horses is the canter. Some members of the breed perform other variations of lateral ambling gaits, including the rack, stepping pace, fox trot and single-foot, which are allowable for pleasure riding but penalized in the show ring.[5] A few Tennessee Walking Horses can trot, and have a long, reaching stride.[9]

History

Hambletonian 10, the foundation stallion of the family that produced Black Allan

Black Allan in 1905.
The Tennessee Walker originated from the cross of Narragansett Pacer and Canadian Pacer horses brought to Kentucky starting in 1790, with gaited Spanish Mustangs imported from Texas. These horses were bred on the limestone pastures of Middle Tennessee, and became known as "Tennessee Pacers". Originally used as all-purpose horses on plantations and farms, they were used for riding, pulling and racing.[1] They were known for their smooth gaits and sure-footedness on the rocky Tennessee terrain. Morgan, Standardbred, Thoroughbred and American Saddlebred blood was also added to the breed through decades of breeding.[5]

In 1886, Black Allan (later known as Allan F-1) was born. By the stallion Allendorf (from the Hambletonian family of Standardbreds) and out of a Morgan mare named Maggie Marshall, he became the foundation sire of the Tennessee Walking Horse breed.[5][10] A failure as a trotting horse, due to his insistence on pacing, Black Allan was instead used for breeding. From his line, a foal named Roan Allen was born in 1904. Able to perform several ambling gaits, Roan Allen became a successful show horse, and in turn sired several famous Tennessee Walking Horses.[1]

The Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders' Association was formed in 1935. To reflect interest in showing horses, the name was changed in 1974 to the current Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders' and Exhibitors' Association (TWHBEA). The stud book was closed in 1947, meaning that since that date every Tennessee Walker must have both its dam and stud registered in order to be eligible for registration. In 1950, the United States Department of Agriculture recognized the Tennessee Walking Horse as a distinct breed.[5]

In 2000, the Tennessee Walking Horse was named the official state horse of the US state of Tennessee.[11] It is the third most-common breed in Kentucky, behind the Thoroughbred and the American Quarter Horse.[12] As of 2005, 450,000 horses have been registered over the life of the TWHBEA, with annual registrations of 13,000–15,000 new foals. While the Tennessee Walking Horse is most common in the southern and southeastern US, it is found throughout the country.[1]

Uses

Flat-shod horse performing the running walk
The Tennessee Walker is noted for its appearance in horse show events, particularly performances in saddle seat-style English riding equipment,[13] but is also a very popular trail riding horse.[5] Some are used for endurance riding. To promote this use, the TWHBEA maintains an awards program in conjunction with the American Endurance Ride Conference.[14][15]

In the 20th century, the Tennessee Walking Horse was crossed with Welsh ponies to create the American Walking Pony, a gaited pony breed.[16]

The breed has also been featured in television, movies and other performing events. The Lone Ranger's horse "Silver" was at times played by a Tennessee Walker. "Trigger, Jr.", the successor to the original "Trigger" made famous by Roy Rogers, was played by a Tennessee Walker named Allen's Gold Zephyr.[13] The position of Traveler, mascot of the University of Southern California Trojans, was held at various times by a purebred Tennessee Walking Horse, and by a Tennessee Walker/Arabian cross.[17]

Horse shows

Western equipment
The two basic categories of Tennessee Walking Horse show competition are called "flat-shod" and "performance". Flat-shod horses compete in many different disciplines under both western and English tack.[18]:19–20 At shows where both divisions are offered, the flat-shod "plantation pleasure" division is judged on brilliance and show presence of the horses while still being well mannered, balanced, and manageable. "Park pleasure" is the most animated of the flat-shod divisions.[19]:31 Flat-shod horses are shown in ordinary horseshoes, and are not allowed to use pads or action devices, though their hooves are sometimes trimmed to a slightly lower angle with more natural toe than seen on stock horse breeds.

Performance horses, sometimes called "padded" or "built up", exhibit flashy and animated gaits, lifting their forelegs high off the ground with each step.[20] This exaggerated action is sometimes called the "Big Lick".[21] The customary style for rider attire and tack is saddle seat. Horses are shod in double and triple-nailed pads,[20] which are sometimes called "stacks".[22] In the early 21st century, this form of shoeing is now prohibited at shows governed by the National Walking Horse Association (NWHA),[18]:3 and the United States Equestrian Federation (USEF).[23] Artificially set tails are seen in "performance" classes, on full-grown horses in halter classes, and in some harness classes, but generally are not allowed in pleasure or flat-shod competition.[24]:12

Horses in western classes are outfitted with Western saddles and related equipment similar to that used by other breeds in western pleasure classes, and exhibitors may not mix English and Western-style equipment. Riders must wear a hat or helmet in western classes.

Tennessee Walkers are also shown in both pleasure and fine harness driving classes, with grooming similar to that of the saddle seat horses.[19]:31, 36, 43 Tennessee Walking Horses are typically shown with a long mane and tail.

In classes where horses are turned out in saddle seat equipment, it is typical for the horse to be shown in a single curb bit with a bit shank under 9.5 inches (24 cm), rather than the double bridle more common to other saddle seat breeds. Riders wear typical saddle seat attire. Hats are not always mandatory, but use of safety helmets is allowed and ranges from strongly encouraged[19]:9 to required in some pleasure division classes.[24]:23

Horse Protection Act
See also: Horse Protection Act of 1970 and Soring
A horse's hoof, held onto a thick stack of pads with a band running over the top of the hoof.
Built up pads, called "stacks", held on by a band over the top of the hoof, are used in performance divisions
An X-ray of a horse's hoof, attached to a thick set of pads filled with nails
X-ray shows nails within the shoe pad that are included for additional weight and might create pressure on the sole of the foot, a type of soring
The showing, exhibition and sale of Tennessee Walking Horses and some other horse breeds is governed by the Horse Protection Act of 1970 (HPA) due to concerns about the practice of soring. This developed during the 1950s and became widespread in the 1960s, resulting in a public outcry against it.[25] Congress passed the Horse Protection Act in 1970, declaring the practice to be "cruel and inhumane".[26] The Act prohibits anyone from entering a sored horse into a show, sale, auction or exhibition,[26] and prohibits drivers from transporting sored horses to a sale or show.[25]

Congress delegated statutory responsibility for enforcement to the management of sales and horse shows, but placed administration of the act with the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) of the United States Department of Agriculture (USDA). Violations of the HPA may result in criminal charges, fines and prison sentences. The USDA certifies certain Horse Industry Organizations (HIOs) to train and license Designated Qualified Persons (DQPs) to complete inspections. APHIS inspection teams, which include inspectors, investigators, and veterinary medical officers, also conduct unannounced inspections of some horse shows, and have the authority to revoke the license of a DQP who does not follow the standards of the Act.[25]

Soring is defined by the HPA with four meanings:

"(3)(A) an irritating or blistering agent has been applied, internally or externally, by a person to any limb of a horse, (B) any burn, cut, or laceration has been inflicted by a person on any limb of a horse, (C) any tack, nail, screw, or chemical agent has been injected by a person into or used by a person on any limb of a horse, or (D) any other substance or device has been used by a person on any limb of a horse or a person has engaged in a practice involving a horse, and, as a result of such application, infliction, injection, use, or practice, such horse suffers, or can reasonably be expected to suffer, physical pain or distress, inflammation, or lameness when walking, "[27]

Action devices, which remain legal but are often used in conjunction with illegal soring practices,[22] are defined in the Code of Federal Regulations as "any boot, collar, chain, roller, or other device which encircles or is placed upon the lower extremity of the leg of a horse in such a manner that it can either rotate around the leg, or slide up and down the leg so as to cause friction, or which can strike the hoof, coronet band or fetlock joint".[28]

Between 1978 and 1982, Auburn University conducted research as to the effect of applications of chemical and physical irritants to the legs of Tennessee Walking Horses. The study found that chains of any weight, used in combination with chemical soring, produced lesions and pain in horses. However, chains of 6 ounces or lighter, used on their own, produced no pain, tissue damage or thermographic changes.[29]


A "big lick" Tennessee Walker wearing legal action devices in 2013. This horse passed strict USDA inspection to be allowed to compete.[30]
Soring can be detected by observing the horse for lameness, assessing its stance and palpating the lower legs. Some trainers trick inspectors by training horses not to react to the pain that palpation may cause, often by severely punishing the horse for flinching when the sored area is touched. The practice is sometimes called "stewarding", in reference to the horse show steward. Some trainers use topical anesthetics, which are timed to wear off before the horse goes into the show ring. Pressure shoeing is also used, eliminating use of chemicals altogether. Trainers who sore their horses have been observed leaving the show grounds when they find that the more stringent federal inspection teams are present.[31]

Although illegal under federal law for more than 40 years, soring is still practiced; criminal charges have been filed against people who violate the Act.[32] Enforcement of the HPA is difficult, due to limited inspection budgets and problems with lax enforcement by inspectors who are hired by the shows they were to police.[31] As a result, while in 1999 there were eight certified HIOs,[26] by 2010, only three organizations remained certified as HIOs, all known to be actively working to end soring.[33][34]

In 2013, legislation to amend and strengthen the HPA was introduced in Congress. The President and executive committee of the TWHBEA voted to support this legislation, but the full board of directors chose not to.[35] The bi-partisan bill, H.R. 1518, was sponsored by Representative Ed Whitfield (R-KY), and Representative Steve Cohen (D-TN), with 216 co-sponsors. On November 13, 2013 a hearing was held. Supporters included the American Horse Council, the American Veterinary Medical Association, members of the TWHBEA, the International Walking Horse Association, and Friends of Sound Horses. Opponents included members of the Performance Horse Show Association, and the Tennessee Commissioner of Agriculture.[36] The legislation did not pass in the 113th Congress and was reintroduced in 2015 for the 114th Congress.[37] In 2016, the USDA proposed new rules independent of the PAST Act, banning stacks and chains, and providing stricter inspections at training barns, auctions, and shows.[38]

Show rules and organizations

Showing with single curb show bridle and braided ribbons added to mane and forelock, typical of English classes
Controversies over shoeing rules, concerns about soring, and the breed industry's compliance with the Horse Protection Act has resulted in the development of multiple governing organizations. The breed registry is kept by the TWHBEA, which promotes all riding disciplines within the breed, but does not sanction horse shows.[39]

The USEF does not currently recognize or sanction any Tennessee Walking Horse shows. In 2013 it banned the use of action devices and stacks at any time in any class.[23]

The Tennessee Walking Horse Heritage Society is a group dedicated to the preservation of the original Tennessee Walker bloodlines, mainly for use as trail and pleasure horses, rather than for showing. Horses listed by the organization descend from the foundation bloodstock registered by the TWHBEA. Pedigrees may not include horses that have been shown with stacks post-1976.[40]

Two organizations have formed to promote the exhibition of flat-shod horses. The National Walking Horse Association (NWHA) promotes only naturally gaited horses in its sanctioned horse shows, has its own rule book, and is the official USEF affiliate organization for the breed.[41][42] The NWHA sanctions horse shows and licenses judges,[18]:7, 23–26 and is an authorized HIO.[33]

The NWHA was in the process of building its own "tracking registry" to document both pedigree and performance achievements of horses recorded there.[43] These included the Spotted Saddle Horse and Racking Horse breeds as well as the Tennessee Walker. However, the NWHA was sued by the Tennessee Walking Horse Breeders & Exhibitors Association (TWHBEA), which eventually won some concessions regarding the use of the TWHBEA’s copyrighted registry certificates by the NWHA. While the judgment did not prohibit the NWHA from continuing its registry service, this is no longer advertised on the NWHA website.[33][44][45]

Friends of Sound Horses (FOSH) also promotes exhibition of flat-shod and barefoot horses.[46] It licenses judges for both pleasure classes and gaited dressage,[47] promotes use of gaited horses in distance riding and sport horse activities,[48] and is an authorized HIO.[46]

Two organizations promulgate rules for horse shows in which action devices are allowed: the Walking Horse Owners Association (WHOA)[49] and "S.H.O.W." ("Sound horses, Honest judging, Objective inspections, Winning fairly")[50] which regulates the Tennessee Walking Horse National Celebration.[32][51] The Celebration has been held in Shelbyville, Tennessee, each August since 1939. It is considered the showcase competition for the breed.[13] In the early 21st century, the Celebration has attracted large amounts of attention and controversy due to the concerns about violations of the Horse Protection Act.[32]

It would be safe to say that as long as there have been gaited horses, there has been confusion as to what the 4-beat lateral gait is. What does the term “gaited horse,” mean? All actions of the horse are called gaits. The walk, trot, lope, canter and gallop are all gaits. The gaited horse has an additional gait. This gait is a smooth, non-jarring action of the horse’s leg.   The “lateral gait” refers to the legs on one side (lateral) moving together, as opposed to the “diagonal gait” where opposite legs work together. The trot is an example of a diagonal gait. However, in some gaits, such as the fox trot, the action is diagonal but it is still a 4-beat gait, making this gait smoother than the 2-beat gait. A 4-beat gait is when each foot hits the ground independently.

Much of this confusion occurs in trying to define the gaits and in trying to judge them. The names of the gaits are used loosely and interchangeably. Different breed association call the gaits by different names. It is difficult to describe accurately the gait, because it is difficult to see what the horse is doing with each foot as he moves along. The gait will have a variety of looks, depending on collection, speed, length of stride, skill of horse and rider, as well as the breed of horse. It is not the general appearance of the horse in action that determines the gait but the specific pattern of footfall, as well as the cadence that defines the gait.    The classy-looking fast moving horse often overshadows a gentle quiet horse performing his gait well. Often the classy horse will determine the standards of the breed, regardless of how well or how poorly he performs the gait or the smoothness of the gait.

The American gaited horse can be traced back to the early 1600’s and found primarily in the Northeast section of the USA. These horses were brought to the USA from Ireland and Scotland. They were originally Galloway and Hobbies. Early settlers were drawn to the gaited horse, as riding was the main way of travel. The smoothness of gait and the gentleness of the horse made them the popular horse of the day. The exact action of these early gaited horses, called Palfreys, is unknown, as history refers to any lateral gait merely as an “ambling” gait.

Out of these breeds came the Narragansett pacer. This breed of horse went on to be the foundation of many of today’s gaited breeds. These include the American Saddlebred, Tennessee Walker, gaited Morgan’s and other smooth gaited saddle horses, such as the Kentucky Mtn. Saddle Horse, Mtn. Pleasure Horse & Rocky Mtn. Horse. Many of these breeds also descended from the Spanish Barb or Spanish Jennet.

The Narragansett Pacer was a smaller horse and did not last long as an America breed. Many were exported to the Caribbean, Africa and Canada. They were crossed with Thoroughbreds. The bloodlines of the pacer are evident in many of the modern breeds. Some people believe that the Canadian Pacer and the Narragansett pacer are one and the same horse.

It appears that the pacer was at the lateral end of the scale, in action, and had a pace/pace pair of genes. When crossed with trotting horses, tot/trot pair of genes, the gait began moving towards the diagonal end of the scale. This is when the Fox Trot showed up. This is one reason, I believe, that breeding should be a major issue in the gaited horse. We need to find the combination that produces a truly comfortable gait, thus reducing some of the frustration in finding the consistency of smoothness desired.

 

The Southwest corner of the USA, dating back to the late 1400’s, brought in the Spanish Barb and the Spanish Jennets. These horses, commonly called Palfreys, were considered the finest and most beautiful horses in the world. A commonly held belief is that they went on to produce the Paso Fino and the Peruvian breeds. This Spanish influence is believed to have also been involved in the development of the Mountain horse in Kentucky. Tradition has it that the foundation stock for theses horses came from the Colorado and New Mexico areas.

The Icelandic horse (shown above) has been kept in seclusion in Iceland for nearly a thousand years. This practice of isolation has preserved the appearance of the original Celtic horse and is one of the oldest breeds in the world.

A lot of cross breeding, inbreeding and selective breeding have brought the modern gaited horses to where they are today. It is hard to trace the exact lines of any particular breed of gaited horse. Regardless of the origins of the lateral gait, and the differences among breeds, the smoothness of the gaited horse is highly prized and is again taking a prominent part in American society. Most American gaited horses exhibit beauty, gently disposition, a willing mind along with a natural 4-beat gait.

Tennessee walking horse, also called Plantation Walking Horse, breed of horse that derives its name from the state of Tennessee and from its distinctive gait—the running walk. In a broad sense, it originated from all the ancestors that could do a running walk. Allan F-I (foaled 1886), a Standardbred stallion with several crosses of Morgan breeding, had the greatest influence on the breed. The walking horse is heavier and stouter than, and lacks the refinement and style of, the American saddle horse. The head is usually carried low. Some are more sloping in the croup and more curved in the hocks than other riding horses. Tennessee walking horses average 15.2 hands (157 cm, or 62 inches) in height and weigh about 450 kg (1,000 pounds). The colours are black, chestnut, bay, brown, roan, gray, yellow, and pure white.

Tennessee Walking Horse stallion with dapple-gray coat.
Tennessee Walking Horse stallion with dapple-gray coat.
© Scott Smudsky
The running walk is a natural gait that may be improved but not acquired by a horse without the natural ability. The gait is faster than a flat-footed walk, with a speed of 10 to 13 km (6 to 8 miles) per hour. The front foot strikes the ground an instant before the diagonal hind foot. The horse has a low, gliding, reaching action, the hind foot overstepping the print of the forefoot by several inches. Official recognition as a distinct breed dates from 1935.

See the Table of Selected Breeds of Light Horses for further information.

Selected breeds of light horses
*1 hand = 4 inches (10.16 cm)
name	origin	height (hands)*	aptitude	characteristics	comments
Akhal-Teke stallion with golden dun coat.
Akhal-Teke	Turkmenistan	14.2–16	riding, racing	long neck carried almost perpendicular to body; long, slender legs; metallic, golden-dun colour is unique to the breed	ancient breed; noted for its endurance and speed
American Paint Horse mare of bay colouring.
American Paint Horse	U.S.	15–16	riding	two colour patterns—overo and tobiano—determined by location of white markings	developed from quarter horse, thoroughbred, and paint breeds; versatile riding horse
American Quarter Horse stallion with buckskin coat.
American Quarter Horse	U.S.	14.2–16	riding, racing, herding	short, fine head with a straight profile; short back; long, powerful croup and shoulders; well-muscled thighs, gaskins, and forearms	one of the most popular breeds; noted for its agility and quick bursts of speed; adapts easily to any riding discipline
American Saddlebred mare with black coat.
American Saddlebred	U.S.	15–16	riding, light draft	small head with long neck lying almost vertical to shoulder; short back; level croup with high tail carriage	performs three gaits (walk, trot, canter) or five gaits (three plus slow gait, rack)
Andalusian stallion with dark gray coat.
Andalusian	Spain	15.1–15.3	riding	arched neck; round and muscular hindquarters with low-set tail; mane and tail are often profuse and wavy	influenced breeds worldwide; used in bullfights
Appaloosa mare with bay colouring.
Appaloosa	U.S.	14.2–16	riding	several colour patterns: snowflake, leopard, marble, frost, and blanket; black and white striped hooves	descended from the spotted horses of the Nez Percé Indians; influenced by Arabian and, most recently, American Quarter Horse blood
Arabian gelding with chestnut coat.
Arabian	Middle East	14–15	riding, light draft	head profile is uniquely concave (dished), tapering to a dainty muzzle; wide-set, large eyes; long, graceful neck; short back; flat croup with distinctive high tail carriage	has refined almost every breed worldwide; considered one of the most beautiful horses; noted for its stamina, excels in endurance competitions
Argentine Criollo with grulla coat.
Argentine Criollo	Argentina	14	riding	short, deep body; long head; heavily muscled	one of the soundest breeds; descended from the Barb, Arab, and Andalusian; common throughout South America; noted for its endurance
Cleveland Bay stallion.
Cleveland Bay	England	16–16.2	riding, light and medium draft, farm work	powerful and substantial build; short legs; always bay in colour	oldest British breed; often crossed with Thoroughbreds to produce excellent hunters and sport horses
Hanoverian stallion with dark bay coat.
Hanoverian	Germany	15.3–17	riding, light draft	long, muscular neck; deep body; powerful hindquarters	excels in dressage and show jumping; elegant, fluid gaits; developed from Holstein, influenced by Thoroughbred and Trakehner blood
Lipizzaner stallion with white coat.
Lipizzaner	Austria (now in Slovenia)	15–16.1	riding, harness, draft, farm work	long head with crested neck; compact, powerful body; foals are born black or brown in colour and usually mature to white-gray	descended from Spanish horses; famous for its association with the Spanish Riding School of Vienna, where they are trained in difficult "high school" movements
Missouri Fox Trotting mare with black coat.
Missouri Fox Trotting Horse	U.S.	14–16	riding	wide, deep-chested body; muscular hind legs	noted for its natural, smooth, "fox-trot" gait; the horse canters with the front feet while trotting with the hind, producing little movement in the back
Morgan stallion with bay coat.
Morgan	U.S.	14.1–15.2	riding, light draft	fine head with arched neck; well-defined withers; long, sloping shoulders; muscular hindquarters	descended from one prepotent stallion; noted for its versatility; possesses great stamina
Paso Fino gelding with palomino coat.
Paso Fino	Puerto Rico	14–15	riding	medium-sized; small head with large, wide-set eyes; legs delicate in appearance	noted for its natural, four-beat, lateral gait, in which the hind foot touches the ground a fraction of a second before the front; the gait is executed at three speeds: paso fino, paso corto, and paso largo
Standardbred gelding with dark bay coat.
Standardbred	U.S.	15–16	harness racing, riding	long, sloping, muscular hindquarters; long, thick mane and tail; typically bay in colour	primarily used for harness racing
Tennessee Walking Horse stallion with dapple-gray coat.
Tennessee Walking Horse	U.S.	15–16	riding	solid build; sturdy, muscular legs; numerous colours and markings	noted for its running walk, a natural, smooth, four-beat gait, in which the horse's head nods in rhythm with the rise and fall of its hooves; considered the most naturally good-tempered horse breed
horse
Thoroughbred, also called English Thoroughbred	England	15–17	riding, flat and jump racing	large, expressive eyes; exceptionally long, sloping shoulders; fine-boned legs with small hooves; thin skin	bred primarily for racing, also excels at dressage, eventing, and jumping; possesses great stamina and courage; bred extensively to improve other breeds
Trakehner stallion with dark bay coat.
Trakehner	East Prussia (now in Lithuania)	16–17	riding, light draft	refined head with large, expressive eyes; long, elegant neck; strong, sloping shoulders	considered one of the most elegant European warmbloods; excels at dressage and show jumping; influenced by Thoroughbred and Arabian blood

This is a featured article. Click here for more information.
Icelandic horse
From Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Icelandic horse
A light colored horse with a dark mane and tail being ridden along a path with a fence, buildings and other horses in the background
Icelandic horse performing the tölt.
Other names	Icelandic Pony
Country of origin	Iceland
Traits
Distinguishing features	Sturdy build, heavy coat, two unique gaits.
Breed standards
United States Icelandic Horse Conference
The Icelandic Horse Society of Great Britain
Equus ferus caballus
The Icelandic horse is a breed of horse developed in Iceland. Although the horses are small, at times pony-sized, most registries for the Icelandic refer to it as a horse. Icelandic horses are long-lived and hardy. In their native country they have few diseases; Icelandic law prevents horses from being imported into the country and exported animals are not allowed to return. The Icelandic displays two gaits in addition to the typical walk, trot, and canter/gallop commonly displayed by other breeds. The only breed of horse in Iceland, they are also popular internationally, and sizable populations exist in Europe and North America. The breed is still used for traditional sheepherding work in its native country, as well as for leisure, showing, and racing.

Developed from ponies taken to Iceland by Norse settlers in the 9th and 10th centuries, the breed is mentioned in literature and historical records throughout Icelandic history; the first reference to a named horse appears in the 12th century. Horses were venerated in Norse mythology, a custom brought to Iceland by the country's earliest settlers. Selective breeding over the centuries has developed the breed into its current form. Natural selection has also played a role, as the harsh Icelandic climate eliminated many horses through cold and starvation. In the 1780s, much of the breed was wiped out in the aftermath of a volcanic eruption at Laki. The first breed society for the Icelandic horse was created in Iceland in 1904, and today the breed is represented by organizations in 19 different nations, organized under a parent association, the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations.

Contents 
1	Breed characteristics
1.1	Gaits
2	History
3	Uses
4	Registration
5	See also
6	References
7	External links
Breed characteristics

A blue-eyed Icelandic horse.
Icelandic horses weigh between 330 and 380 kilograms (730 and 840 lb)[1] and stand an average of 13 and 14 hands (52 and 56 inches, 132 and 142 cm) high, which is often considered pony size, but breeders and breed registries always refer to Icelandics as horses.[2][3] Several theories have been put forward as to why Icelandics are always called horses, among them the breed's spirited temperament and large personality.[4][5] Another theory suggests that the breed's weight, bone structure and weight-carrying abilities mean it can be classified as a horse, rather than a pony.[6] The breed comes in many coat colors, including chestnut, dun, bay, black, gray, palomino, pinto and roan. There are over 100 names for various colors and color patterns in the Icelandic language.[2][3] They have well-proportioned heads, with straight profiles and wide foreheads. The neck is short, muscular, and broad at the base; the withers broad and low; the chest deep; the shoulders muscular and slightly sloping; the back long; the croup broad, muscular, short and slightly sloping. The legs are strong and short, with relatively long cannon bones and short pasterns. The mane and tail are full, with coarse hair, and the tail is set low. The breed is known to be hardy and an easy keeper.[7] The breed has a double coat developed for extra insulation in cold temperatures.[8]

A long haired dark horse standing in snow covered grass with mountains in the background
An Icelandic horse with a heavy winter coat
Characteristics differ between various groups of Icelandic horses, depending on the focus of individual breeders. Some focus on animals for pack and draft work, which are conformationally distinct from those bred for work under saddle, which are carefully selected for their ability to perform the traditional Icelandic gaits. Others are bred solely for horsemeat. Some breeders focus on favored coat colors.[2]

Members of the breed are not usually ridden until they are four years old, and structural development is not complete until age seven. Their most productive years are between eight and eighteen, although they retain their strength and stamina into their twenties. An Icelandic mare that lived in Denmark reached a record age of 56,[4] while another horse, living in Great Britain, reached the age of 42.[9] The horses are highly fertile, and both sexes are fit for breeding up to age 25; mares have been recorded giving birth at age 27. The horses tend to not be easily spooked, probably the result of not having any natural predators in their native Iceland.[4] Icelandics tend to be friendly, docile and easy to handle, although also enthusiastic and self-assured.[10] As a result of their isolation from other horses, disease in the breed within Iceland is mostly unknown, except for some kinds of internal parasites. The low prevalence of disease in Iceland is maintained by laws preventing horses exported from the country being returned, and by requiring that all equine equipment taken into the country be either new and unused or fully disinfected. As a result, native horses have no acquired immunity to disease; an outbreak on the island would be likely to be devastating to the breed.[4] This presents problems with showing native Icelandic horses against others of the breed from outside the country, as no livestock of any species can be imported into Iceland, and once horses leave the country they are not allowed to return.[10]

Gaits
The Icelandic is a "five-gaited" breed, known for its sure-footedness and ability to cross rough terrain. As well as the typical gaits of walk, trot, and canter/gallop, the breed is noted for its ability to perform two additional gaits. Although most horse experts consider the canter and gallop to be separate gaits, on the basis of a small variation in the footfall pattern,[11] Icelandic breed registries consider the canter and gallop one gait, hence the term "five-gaited".[12]

A tan colored horse with darker brown on its hindquarters being ridden in a dirt ring by a rider in black formal attire.
A palomino Icelandic being ridden at a tölt
The first additional gait is a four-beat lateral ambling gait known as the tölt. This is known for its explosive acceleration and speed; it is also comfortable and ground-covering.[7] There is considerable variation in style within the gait, and thus the tölt is variously compared to similar lateral gaits such as the rack of the Saddlebred, the largo of the Paso Fino, or the running walk of the Tennessee Walking Horse. Like all lateral ambling gaits, the footfall pattern is the same as the walk (left hind, left front, right hind, right front), but differs from the walk in that it can be performed at a range of speeds, from the speed of a typical fast walk up to the speed of a normal canter. Some Icelandic horses prefer to tölt, while others prefer to trot; correct training can improve weak gaits, but the tölt is a natural gait present from birth.[1][12][13] There are two varieties of the tölt that are considered incorrect by breeders. The first is an uneven gait called a "Pig's Pace" or "Piggy-pace" that is closer to a two-beat pace than a four-beat amble. The second is called a Valhopp and is a tölt and canter combination most often seen in untrained young horses or horses that mix their gaits. Both varieties are normally uncomfortable to ride.[13]

The breed also performs a pace called a skeið, flugskeið or "flying pace". It is used in pacing races, and is fast and smooth,[2][4] with some horses able to reach up to 30 miles per hour (48 km/h).[10] Not all Icelandic horses can perform this gait; animals that perform both the tölt and the flying pace in addition to the traditional gaits are considered the best of the breed.[10] The flying pace is a two-beat lateral gait with a moment of suspension between footfalls; each side has both feet land almost simultaneously (left hind and left front, suspension, right hind and right front). It is meant to be performed by well-trained and balanced horses with skilled riders. It is not a gait used for long-distance travel. A slow pace is uncomfortable for the rider and is not encouraged when training the horse to perform the gait.[12] Although most pacing horses are raced in harness using sulkies, in Iceland horses are raced while ridden.[10]

History
A gray horse being ridden at speed along a dirt track by a man in a bright orange shirt and black pants. A grassy bank and vehicles are seen in the background.
An Icelandic horse being ridden at the flying pace
The ancestors of the Icelandic horse were probably taken to Iceland by Viking Age Scandinavians between 860 and 935 AD. The Norse settlers were followed by immigrants from Norse colonies in Ireland, the Isle of Man and the Western Isles of Scotland.[2] These later settlers arrived with the ancestors of what would elsewhere become Shetland, Highland, and Connemara ponies, which were crossed with the previously imported animals.[7] There may also have been a connection with the Yakut pony,[14] and the breed has physical similarities to the Nordlandshest of Norway.[15] Other breeds with similar characteristics include the Faroe pony of the Faeroe Islands[16] and the Norwegian Fjord horse.[17] Genetic analyses have revealed links between the Mongolian horse and the Icelandic horse.[18][19][20] Mongolian horses are believed to have been originally imported from Russia by Swedish traders; this imported Mongol stock subsequently contributed to the Fjord, Exmoor, Scottish Highland, Shetland and Connemara breeds, all of which have been found to be genetically linked to the Icelandic horse.

About 900 years ago, attempts were made to introduce eastern blood into the Icelandic, resulting in a degeneration of the stock.[2] In 982 AD the Icelandic Althing (parliament) passed laws prohibiting the importation of horses into Iceland, thus ending crossbreeding. The breed has now been bred pure in Iceland for more than 1,000 years.[21][22]

The earliest Norse people venerated the horse as a symbol of fertility, and white horses were slaughtered at sacrificial feasts and ceremonies. When these settlers arrived in Iceland, they brought their beliefs, and their horses, with them.[2] Horses played a significant part in Norse mythology, and several horses played major roles in the Norse myths, among them the eight-footed pacer named Sleipnir, owned by Odin, chief of the Norse gods.[23] Skalm, a mare who is the first Icelandic horse known by name, appeared in the Book of Settlements from the 12th century. According to the book, a chieftain named Seal-Thorir founded a settlement at the place where Skalm stopped and lay down with her pack. Horses also play key roles in the Icelandic sagas Hrafnkel's Saga, Njal's Saga and Grettir's Saga. Although written in the 13th century, these three sagas are set as far back as the 9th century. This early literature has an influence today, with many riding clubs and horse herds in modern Iceland still bearing the names of horses from Norse mythology.[10]

Horses were often considered the most prized possession of a medieval Icelander.[24] Indispensable to warriors, war horses were sometimes buried alongside their fallen riders,[10] and stories were told of their deeds. Icelanders also arranged for bloody fights between stallions; these were used for entertainment and to pick the best animals for breeding, and they were described in both literature and official records from the Commonwealth period of 930 to 1262 AD.[2] Stallion fights were an important part of Icelandic culture, and brawls, both physical and verbal, among the spectators were common. The conflicts at the horse fights gave rivals a chance to improve their political and social standing at the expense of their enemies and had wide social and political repercussions, sometimes leading to the restructuring of political alliances. However, not all human fights were serious, and the events provided a stage for friends and even enemies to battle without the possibility of major consequences. Courting between young men and women was also common at horse fights.[25]


An Icelandic mare and foal
Natural selection played a major role in the development of the breed, as large numbers of horses died from lack of food and exposure to the elements. Between 874 and 1300 AD, during the more favorable climatic conditions of the medieval warm period,[26] Icelandic breeders selectively bred horses according to special rules of color and conformation. From 1300 to 1900, selective breeding became less of a priority; the climate was often severe and many horses and people died. Between 1783 and 1784, around 70% of the horses in Iceland were killed by volcanic ash poisoning and starvation after the 1783 eruption of Lakagígar. The eruption lasted eight months, covered hundreds of square miles of land with lava, and rerouted or dried up several rivers.[4][27] The population slowly recovered during the next hundred years, and from the beginning of the 20th century selective breeding again became important.[4] The first Icelandic breed societies were established in 1904, and the first breed registry in Iceland was established in 1923.[1]

Icelandics were exported to Great Britain before the 20th century to work as pit ponies in the coal mines, because of their strength and small size. However, those horses were never registered and little evidence of their existence remains. The first formal exports of Icelandic horses were to Germany in the 1940s.[24] Great Britain's first official imports were in 1956, when a Scottish farmer, Stuart McKintosh, began a breeding program. Other breeders in Great Britain followed McKintosh's lead, and the Icelandic Horse Society of Great Britain was formed in 1986.[21][28] The number of Icelandic horses exported to other nations has steadily increased since the first exports of the mid-19th century.[24] Since 1969, multiple societies have worked together to preserve, improve and market these horses under the auspices of the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations.[29] Today, the Icelandic remains a breed known for its purity of bloodline, and is the only horse breed present in Iceland.[7]

The Icelandic is especially popular in western Europe, Scandinavia, and North America.[4] There are about 80,000 Icelandic horses in Iceland (compared to a human population of 317,000), and around 100,000 abroad. Almost 50,000 are in Germany, which has many active riding clubs and breed societies.[10]

Uses
Icelandic horses still play a large part in Icelandic life, despite increasing mechanization and road improvements that diminish the necessity for the breed's use. The first official Icelandic horse race was held at Akureyri in 1874,[2] and many races are still held throughout the country from April through June. Both gallop and pace races are held, as well as performance classes showcasing the breed's unique gaits.[30] Winter events are often held, including races on frozen bodies of water. In 2009 such an event resulted in both horses and riders falling into the water and needing to be rescued.[31] The first shows, focused on the quality of animals as breeding stock, were held in 1906.[10] The Agricultural Society of Iceland, along with the National Association of Riding Clubs, now organizes regular shows with a wide variety of classes.[2] Some horses are still bred for slaughter, and much of the meat is exported to Japan.[1] Farmers still use the breed to round up sheep in the Icelandic highlands, but most horses are used for competition and leisure riding.[10]

Registration

A herd of Icelandic horses
Today, the Icelandic horse is represented by associations in 19 countries, with the International Federation of Icelandic Horse Associations (FEIF) serving as a governing international parent organization.[32] The FEIF was founded on May 25, 1969, with six countries as original members: Austria, Denmark, Germany, Iceland, the Netherlands, and Switzerland. France and Norway joined in 1971, and Belgium and Sweden in 1975. Later, Finland, Canada, Great Britain, USA, Faroe Islands, Luxembourg, Italy, Slovenia and Ireland became members, but Ireland subsequently left because of a lack of members. New Zealand has been given the status of "associate member" as its membership base is small.[33] In 2000, WorldFengur was established as the official FEIF registry for Icelandic horses.[34] The registry is a web database program that is used as a studbook to track the history and bloodlines of the Icelandic breed.[35] The registry contains information on the pedigree, breeder, owner, offspring, photo, breeding evaluations and assessments, and unique identification of each horse registered. The database was established by the Icelandic government in cooperation with the FEIF.[34] Since its inception, around 300,000 Icelandic horses, living and dead, have been registered worldwide.[35] The Islandpferde-Reiter- und Züchterverband is an organization of German riders and breeders of Icelandic horses and the association of all Icelandic horse clubs in Germany.[36]