One of the biggest questions asked during the first week of the 2016 summer Olympics in Rio was why did those pools turn green? Olympics watchers were shocked to find the once-pristine blue waters of the diving pool at the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center to turn a dark green hue on Aug. 9. Less than 24 hours, the pool used for water polo and synchronized swimming turned a similar shade.

Now, we have an official answer for the color shift -- human error that led to 160 liters of hydrogen peroxide being mistakenly dumped into the pools on Aug. 5, the New York Times reports. Olympics officials said that the hydrogen peroxide "neutralized" the chlorine in the pools, making way for the growth of "organic compounds" that possibly included algae.

It was an unsightly and somewhat embarrassing mistake for Olympics officials.

"Of course it's an embarrassment," Mario Andrada, a spokesman for the Rio Games, said at a press conference. "We are hosting the Olympic Games, and athletes are here, so water is going to be an issue. We should have been better in fixing it quickly. We learned painful lessons the hard way."

Best of the Rio Olympics
The Times reported that on Saturday, the diving pool was still a dark "bottle-green" color, and that, by contrast, the second pool started looking bluer again. Given that synchronized swimmers need to see one another below the water's surface, Olympics officials were quick to try to clear up the second pool. They decided to drain all 3,725,000 liters of water from the pool and replace it with the clear water from a practice pool.

So, who is to blame? Olympics officials did not want to blame a specific individually, but they did say that it looks like the hydrogen peroxide and been applied by a local pool maintenance worker.

Hydrogen peroxide is an appropriate pool-cleaning tool, but not when combined with chlorine, Gustavo Nascimiento, director of venue management for the Rio Olympics, said at the conference. Once athletes started using the pools, the neutralized chlorine powered the growth of the "organic compounds" that made the pools turn green.

"The electronic monitoring system that measures the amount of chlorine in the water was betrayed by this chemistry," Nascimento added.

The pools' monitors showed that there was the right amount of chlorine in the water, but they did not accurately pinpoint when the chlorine was no longer working

It was the contractor’s fault.

After offering little clarity about why the water in two Olympic competition pools mysteriously turned green this week, Rio 2016 officials said Saturday it was because a a contractor poured hydrogen peroxide into the diving well and the large pool in the center last week. The chemical reacted with the chlorine and turned the water an emerald green and increasingly murky.

Officials initially blamed the color on sunlight and lack of wind in the open-air aquatic center, which is used for diving, synchronized swimming and water polo.

Hydrogen peroxide is a de-chlorinating agent, which means it undoes what chlorine is supposed to do kill germs and keep water clear. That could explain the murkiness that resulted, and, as the days went by, only got worse.

Rio officials maintained that the water was not a health hazard to athletes, and training sessions and competitions continued in the green pools.

But on Saturday, the pools were drained so the increasingly swampy water could be replaced with fresh water in time for synchronized swimming, which requires competitors and judges to have good visibility underwater. The process will take six hours, according to the AP, and another four hours to fill the pool, which will hopefully be ready for athletes by Sunday morning.

“Of course it is an embarrassment because we are hosting the Olympic Games,” Rio 2016 spokesman Mario Andrada told the AP. “It should be light blue, transparent. We could have done better in fixing it quickly. We learned a painful lesson the hard way.”

That seems to be the theme for the operations snafus at these Games. On Friday, three swimmers competing at the Olympic Aquatics Center were driven to the Olympic Stadium instead, 40 minutes away, forcing officials to change the order of events to give the athletes time to return to the pool and warm up.

Much and more has been made about the water color at the Maria Lenk Aquatics Center, which inexplicably turned green overnight on Tuesday. Rio 2016 director of venue management Gustavo Nascimento and Rio 2016 Organizing Committee executive director Mario Andrada addressed the media on Saturday to explain what really happened. 

Nascimento cited two main sources for the color change: The mistaken introduction of 80 liters of hydrogen peroxide and the expected introduction of 120 athletes. 

"We investigated and found that on the day of the Opening Ceremonies of the Games, 80 liters of hydrogen peroxide was put in the water," Nascimento said. "This creates a reaction to the chlorine which neutralises the ability of the chlorine to kill organics.

"We have an electronics system that measures the amount of chlorine in the water because chlorine is what kills the organics. This electronic management system was betrayed by the chemistry that was inserted manually by one of our contractor's operators. Our contractor's failure is our failure.

"What happened was that the electronics system found that the chlorine amount was OK in the water. The problem was that the chlorine in the water was somewhat neutralised. It was asleep and not killing organics.

"Due to the insertion of 120 athletes in the diving tank and the extended period of time the athletes of water polo stay in the water, the amount of organics in the water grew."
Rio Olympics Diving Green Blue Pool
Tracking the color of the Rio diving pool day by day
The color of the diving well at the Maria Lenk Aquatics Center has been a surprising storyline at the 2016 Rio Olympics. Take a look at how it's changed with each day of competition...
View gallery
The pool used for synchronized swimming and water polo, which began to turn after the diving pool and not to the same extent, was drained and refilled with 3,725,000 liters of water from an adjacent practice pool, which was unaffected.

However, the diving well was not drained.
