Rio de Janeiro spent about $4.6 billion to host the 2016 Summer Olympics. Six months later, four months after the end of the Paralympic Games, the city's Olympic infrastructure is falling apart.

Over the weekend, the Brazilian news outlet O Globo published footage of various abandoned and decrepit Olympic venues. According to O Globo, limited security has resulted in theft, and the ceilings are falling in. Other venues appear to not have received any necessary upkeep. Even the Maracana, Rio's Olympic stadium, is without power as city officials argue about who should pay the electricity bills.

Most shocking is a warm-up pool that has turned orange.

Rio Warmup Pool Orange
Globo
O Globo reports that mud, insects, and rainwater have contributed to the jarring color. The tiles in the background, which were made by the Brazilian artist Adriana Varejao, have either fallen or been taken, according to O Globo.

ADVERTISEMENT
For comparison, here's the pool (from a different angle) in the summer:

Rio Training Pool Before
Al Bello/Getty
And here's what the building housing the competition pools looked like:

GettyImages 519821354
Buda Mendes/Getty Images
Murky water has pooled in other parts of the Olympic Park, too:

Rio Venues
O Globo
Here are the ceilings:

Rio Venues 2
O Globo
During the Olympics, the pools were a source of frustration as they turned different, but equally unpleasant, shades of green— ironic, considering the uproar before the games about Rio's sewage-infested bodies of water.

ADVERTISEMENT
The argument against hosting the Olympics has always been that it doesn't make sense to pour billions of dollars into sporting venues that would most likely have no use after the two-week spectacle.

From Athens to Beijing, abandoned Olympic venues are common. Rio is the latest example — at least until after the next Olympics.



n August viewers were disgusted when the Olympic diving pool in Rio turned an unhealthy shade of green. 

But six months after the games, an abandoned swimming pool in the complex has turned orange from mud, rot and dead insects. 

The different pool, which was used as a practice area during the games, has been abandoned and drenched in muddy rainwater.

An abandoned swimming pool in the Aquatics Stadium in Rio has turned an unhealthy shade of orange from mud, rot and dead insects. It was used as a practice area during the games	+9
An abandoned swimming pool in the Aquatics Stadium in Rio has turned an unhealthy shade of orange from mud, rot and dead insects. It was used as a practice area during the games

The Aquatics Stadium has been left in a state of disrepair six months after the Rio Games	+9
The Aquatics Stadium has been left in a state of disrepair six months after the Rio Games

Even though organisers ploughed millions into the state-of-the-art sports village, the Olympic village is deserted less than a year after the games.

The Maracanã stadium, which was used for the opening and closing ceremonies, has been looted, with more than 7,000 seats ripped out, according to O Globo. 

The venue, which was built for the 1950 World Cup, has been left to decay.

In August, the diving pool at the summer games turned green because 80 litres of hydrogen peroxide was poured in. Organisers had to drain the pool after divers complained	+9
In August, the diving pool at the summer games turned green because 80 litres of hydrogen peroxide was poured in. Organisers had to drain the pool after divers complained

The Maracanã stadium's turf has turned brown after organisers gave the complex to Rio's state government and a consortium of private companies after the games	+9
The Maracanã stadium's turf has turned brown after organisers gave the complex to Rio's state government and a consortium of private companies after the games

Pictured, the Olympic Tennis Centre in August, which was hosting the beach volleyball competition. According to Brazillian news network O Globo, the 'smell of mold is noticeable'	+9
Pictured, the Olympic Tennis Centre in August, which was hosting the beach volleyball competition. According to Brazillian news network O Globo, the 'smell of mold is noticeable'

Stray cats have moved into the sports complex, which was given a $600 million renovation ahead of the 2014 World Cup.

Grass around the stadium is overgrown and the 'smell of mold is noticeable', according to the Brazillian news network. 

Rio's state government and the consortium of private companies took over Maracanã after the Olympics.

The Olympic park has been abandoned since the games finished and stray cats have made their home in the stadiums. Looters have taken 7,000 seats from the Maracanã stadium	+9
The Olympic park has been abandoned since the games finished and stray cats have made their home in the stadiums. Looters have taken 7,000 seats from the Maracanã stadium

Viewers were disgusted in August when the diving pool turned green. Organisers had to drain one million gallons from the pool to fix the problem	+9
Viewers were disgusted in August when the diving pool turned green. Organisers had to drain one million gallons from the pool to fix the problem

However they say they are not responsible for maintaining it, and blame the Rio 2016 organizing committee for its current state.

The committee told O Globo that it delivered the stadium in the condition required by its contract with the state and construction firms, but acknowledged they have not yet completed necessary repairs.

During the summer games, the diving pool turned green overnight after 80 litres of hydrogen peroxide were dumped in it. 

The current owners say they are not responsible for maintaining it, and blame the Rio 2016 organizing committee for its current state	+9
The current owners say they are not responsible for maintaining it, and blame the Rio 2016 organizing committee for its current state

The committee acknowledged they have not yet completed necessary repairs. During the games, a German diver said: 'The whole building [the Aquatics Centre] smells like a fart'	+9
The committee acknowledged they have not yet completed necessary repairs. During the games, a German diver said: 'The whole building [the Aquatics Centre] smells like a fart'

Organisers had to drain the one million gallon pool after diving star Tom Daley complained about the state of the water. 

He tweeted on August 12: 'Diving pool is closed this morning. Hopefully that means we haven't been diving in anything too bad the last couple of days!'

A German diver also said: 'The whole building smells like a fart.'



Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-4209186/Rio-2016-Olympic-swimming-pool-turns-orange.html#ixzz5GpxYBKBy 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook


The Olympic diving pool has been closed today after it turned a worrying shade of green earlier this week.

The colour change had already prompted health scares as organisers scrambled to assess what could be causing the transformation. 

A spokesman for the IOC insisted that the green water didn't put the athletes at risk but the decision to close the pool today could reignite concerns.

Bronze medallist Tom Daley tweeted: 'Diving pool is closed this morning. Hopefully that means we haven't been diving in anything too bad the last couple of days!' 

Scroll down for video 

Getting back some of your old colour? A lifeguard cleans the diving pool before the Women's Diving 3m Springboard Preliminary Round	+31
Getting back some of your old colour? A lifeguard cleans the diving pool before the Women's Diving 3m Springboard Preliminary Round

The Olympic diving pool has closed today (pictured) after it turned a murky green on Tuesday night. Bronze medallist Tom Daley tweeted about the closure, sparking concerns about what could be in the water	+31
The Olympic diving pool has closed today (pictured) after it turned a murky green on Tuesday night. Bronze medallist Tom Daley tweeted about the closure, sparking concerns about what could be in the water

Olympic Bronze medallist Tom Daley (pictured with Daniel Goodfellow) tweeted that the diving pool has now closed, after it turned an alarming green on Tuesday night	+31
Olympic Bronze medallist Tom Daley (pictured with Daniel Goodfellow) tweeted that the diving pool has now closed, after it turned an alarming green on Tuesday night

Diver Tom Daley takes part in a training session on Wednesday after the water in the diving pool turned green in the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center in Rio	+31
Diver Tom Daley takes part in a training session on Wednesday after the water in the diving pool turned green in the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center in Rio


A Rio Olympics source working at the outside Maria Lenk Aquatics outside pool told MailOnline: 'The water polo guys are really suffering out there due to the chlorine'	+31
A Rio Olympics source working at the outside Maria Lenk Aquatics outside pool told MailOnline: 'The water polo guys are really suffering out there due to the chlorine'



RELATED ARTICLES
Previous
1
2
Next

Rio Olympics 2016 LIVE: Tonia Couch features in diving...

Oklahoma couple spend TWO DAYS traveling to Rio for...

Can the Golden girls deliver? Simone Biles and the 'Fierce...

'I thought the cold war was over': Booed Russian drugs cheat...

'It's OUR POOL karaoke!' Becky Adlington, Helen Skelton and...
SHARE THIS ARTICLE
Share
While the dive pool turned green on Tuesday night, the water polo pool didn't start changing from blue to green until Wednesday. 

But bosses at the Maria Lenk Aquatic Centre said the pool had been closed so the water could return to a 'normal' blue colour.

A statement said: 'We confirm that the pool at the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center was closed this morning. Fina is knowing the decision and supports. 

'The reason for this is that the water should be no drive to the pool again blue color as quickly as possible. 

'Athletes are doing other training elsewhere in the Maria Lenk this morning. the workouts in the pool back to normal at 13h and competitions, at 15:30.'

The diving pool closure comes the day after athletes complained of stinging eyes after competing in the neighbouring water polo pool because organisers 'over-chlorinated' the outside swimming pool in a bid to stop the colour change.

They say huge quantities of the chemical were put into the water in the polo pool - next door to the diving pool - which also turned a bizarre murky colour on Wednesday night.

But athletes say that the water is damaging their game - and even making them feel nauseous due to the high levels of chlorine used.

Team USA men's water polo captain Tony Azevedo said he could 'barely' open his eyes for the final quarter, after their 6-3 victory over France on Wednesday.

'This is the Olympic Games and they are putting so much chlorine in the water that people can't see. You can't have that,' he added.  

Despite initial claims from Olympic chiefs that the dive pool was turned green by the algae, they later suggested it could be down to a change in the water's alkalinity	+31
Despite initial claims from Olympic chiefs that the dive pool was turned green by the algae, they later suggested it could be down to a change in the water's alkalinity

Team GB diver Jack Laugher (right) - who won gold on Wednesday night with teammate Chris Mears - believes he has solved the mystery of the green pools, claiming the ink has seeped into the water from plastic boards around the pool	+31
Team GB diver Jack Laugher (right) - who won gold on Wednesday night with teammate Chris Mears - believes he has solved the mystery of the green pools, claiming the ink has seeped into the water from plastic boards around the pool

'I could barely open my eyes for the final quarter,' insisted Team USA men's water polo captain Tony Azevedo (pictured), after their 6-3 victory over France on Wednesday 	+31
'I could barely open my eyes for the final quarter,' insisted Team USA men's water polo captain Tony Azevedo (pictured), after their 6-3 victory over France on Wednesday 


Inspectors test samples from the diving pool which turned green in colour after what officials claimed was a change in the water's alkilinity	+31
Inspectors test samples from the diving pool which turned green in colour after what officials claimed was a change in the water's alkilinity

Olympic divers have also had to contend with the green water - but it didn't affect the performance of 3m sychronised divers Jack Laugher and Chris Mears on Wednesday night as they claimed gold for Britain	+31
Olympic divers have also had to contend with the green water - but it didn't affect the performance of 3m sychronised divers Jack Laugher and Chris Mears on Wednesday night as they claimed gold for Britain

Meanwhile Team GB diver Jack Laugher believes he has solved the mystery of the green pools, claiming the ink has seeped into the water from plastic boards around the pool. 

A Rio Olympics source working at the outside Maria Lenk Aquatics outside pool told MailOnline: 'The water polo guys are really suffering out there due to the chlorine.

'One member of the US team said he couldn't see a thing towards the end of the game. He was literally blinded because there was so much chlorine in the water. Other guys said the chlorine made them feel sick.'

The source added: 'The diving pool went green because they [offficials] ran out of chemicals.

'But now they are trying to over-compensate by pouring tons of the stuff into the other [outside] pool and it's making the athletes suffer.'    

 Hungary's Gergo Zalanki said he wasn't sure the levels of chlorine were the only problem with the pool.

'My eyes hurt from the water. It's not good,' he said after his team took on Greece in a game that ended in an 8-8 draw.

'It feels like they added more chlorine to the water but I'm not sure. I'm used to it because we have a lot of water like this in Hungary, but I think there might be something else wrong too.'  






Britain's Jack Laugher and Chris Mears seemed untroubled by the green water as they took part in training before the men's synchronised 3-metre springboard diving final - which they went on to win on Wednesday night	+31
Britain's Jack Laugher and Chris Mears seemed untroubled by the green water as they took part in training before the men's synchronised 3-metre springboard diving final - which they went on to win on Wednesday night

Olympic divers have also had to contend with the green water - but British gold medallist Chris Mears, 23, said the green colour actually may have helped them to victory	+31
Olympic divers have also had to contend with the green water - but British gold medallist Chris Mears, 23, said the green colour actually may have helped them to victory

And the Australians complained after their 8-6 victory against Japan. 

Australian star Richie Campbell said: 'I don't know what's happened. I think they bumped up the chlorine or something because my eyes are stinging.

'It hurts at the end of the game and we'll probably get teary eyes for the next couple of hours but that's alright. I felt it more towards the end. It wasn't too bad in the water but now it's really starting to sting.

'I didn't really notice straight away but you could tell on the TV when we were watching inside. But that's all right, we've probably played in worse pools.'  

Olympic divers have also had to contend with the green water - but it didn't affect the performance of 3m sychronised divers Jack Laugher and Chris Mears on Wednesday night as they claimed gold for Britain.    

Olympic champion Chris Mears, 23, said the green colour actually may have helped them to victory.

'Oh, the swamp pool!' he laughed, when asked about the furore on ITV's This Morning.

'It was interesting and something I've never seen before. It's not dangerous we've been assured by everyone… and it didn't taste any different – because obviously accidentally you do kind of drink some of the water!

'Also it kind of helped in a way because when you're spinning around sometimes when you're seeing a blue sky and a blue pool it can be quite difficult, but with a green pool it was pretty easy.'  



Bronze medal winner Tom Daley noticed the pool had changed colour on Tuesday, tweeting: 'Ermm... what happened?!'	+31
Bronze medal winner Tom Daley noticed the pool had changed colour on Tuesday, tweeting: 'Ermm... what happened?!'

US diver Abby Johnston also tweeted about the closure, and went on to urge the organisers to 'fix the swamp'	+31
US diver Abby Johnston also tweeted about the closure, and went on to urge the organisers to 'fix the swamp'

The pool water very noticeably changed colour throughout the day on Tuesday. Left, how the water appeared on Tuesday morning, and right, how it looked on Tuesday afternoon	+31
The pool water very noticeably changed colour throughout the day on Tuesday. Left, how the water appeared on Tuesday morning, and right, how it looked on Tuesday afternoon

Diver Jack Laugher, however, has come up with his own theory about why the water has changed colour - claiming that the ink from the plastic boards surrounding the pool has run into the water. 

'We've got some big plastic boards that go into the water just for decoration and effect,' he said. 'But you can see on the waterline that they're blue when below the waterline, and above the waterline it's green.

'And we think maybe a load of ink has run into the pool potentially. It's safe and the doctors have given it the all clear or whatever. And it's different as well, you know, it's another one of those added different conditions.'   

But Rio Olympic spokesman Mario Andrada said: 'We have treated both pools during the night [on Tuesday] and the alkalinity levels have already improved.

'We expect the colour to be back to blue very shortly.'

He added: 'There's absolutely no risk, no effect for athletes who will compete in the pool.'  


Despite initial claims from Olympic chiefs that the dive pool was turned green by the algae, they later suggested it could be down to a change in the water's alkalinity.  

Mr Andrada said organisers failed to take into account that lots of people would be using the pool - which apparently affects its alkalinity. 

'We probably failed to note that with more athletes, the water could be affected,' he said. 'The people in charge of the pool should have done more intensive tests. We brought in a team of independent experts to check.'


Twitter erupted as Tuesday night's synchronised diving final turned into a farce as the pool faded from blue to green.  



more videos
123
Watch video Football fans exchange punches ahead of Champions League final
Watch video Shocking video shows man throwing hot coffee on McDonald's manager
Watch video Stadium stands and sings the National Anthem a capella
Watch video Broke 29-year old student won TV show to marry Russian oligarch
Watch video Shocking moment man at drive thru restaurant shots robbery suspect
Watch video Far-right protesters descend on Whitehall after Tommy Robinson arrest
Watch video Flash flood tears out street poles on Ellicott City street
Watch video Bodycam contradicts NAACP president's racial profiling claims
Watch video Little Caesars employee shoots robber in scary clown mask
Watch video Woman hilariously shaves her legs by poolside at hotel resort
Watch video Teenager cries with joy after receiving surprise graduation present
Watch video Black woman rants at Jewish man as he calls her racist on NY metro
Diver Chris Mears (right with teammate Jack Laugher) said: 'It’s not dangerous we’ve been assured by everyone… and it didn’t taste any different – because obviously accidentally you do kind of drink some of the water!'	+31
Diver Chris Mears (right with teammate Jack Laugher) said: 'It's not dangerous we've been assured by everyone… and it didn't taste any different – because obviously accidentally you do kind of drink some of the water!'


The water in diving pools is typically five to ten degrees warmer than the water in pools used for swimming. Warmer water is more conducive to algae growth which could explain the green shade of the water, according to experts who initially blamed algae for the colour change	+31
The water in diving pools is typically five to ten degrees warmer than the water in pools used for swimming. Warmer water is more conducive to algae growth which could explain the green shade of the water, according to experts who initially blamed algae for the colour change

Other theories suggest because pool  is also outdoors, it can accelerate algae growth if the water is exposed to the sun	+31
Other theories suggest because pool  is also outdoors, it can accelerate algae growth if the water is exposed to the sun

There were bizarre scenes at the Olympic women's 10m synchronised diving final on Tuesday (pictured) when the pool first turned a murky shade of green	+31
There were bizarre scenes at the Olympic women's 10m synchronised diving final on Tuesday (pictured) when the pool first turned a murky shade of green


Rio's aquatic centre is set apart from those of previous years in that it is an outdoor arena, and the green diving pool could be the first failing of the system. 

Meanwhile experts expounded their own theories about why the water would change colour, with most opting for algae as the probable cause. 

Exposure to sunlight and ultra violent light can break down chlorine-based disinfectants and cause them to evaporate, they said.

Ralph Riley, from the UK Pool Water Treatment Advisory Group, added: 'It needs the chlorine disinfectant to be clear, bright, blue and sparkling, so if it's not there, the water could become discoloured.'

Other theories suggested the corrosion of pipes, releasing copper or iron ions into the water, could be to blame.

While others, on social media, suggested the discolour might have been caused by an athlete urinating in the water. 



more videos
123
Watch video Football fans exchange punches ahead of Champions League final
Watch video Shocking video shows man throwing hot coffee on McDonald's manager
Watch video Stadium stands and sings the National Anthem a capella
Watch video Little Caesars employee shoots robber in scary clown mask
Watch video Woman hilariously shaves her legs by poolside at hotel resort
Watch video Teenager cries with joy after receiving surprise graduation present
Watch video Broke 29-year old student won TV show to marry Russian oligarch
Watch video Shocking moment man at drive thru restaurant shots robbery suspect
Watch video Far-right protesters descend on Whitehall after Tommy Robinson arrest
Watch video Flash flood tears out street poles on Ellicott City street
Watch video Black woman rants at Jewish man as he calls her racist on NY metro
Watch video Moment hero scales Parisian building to rescue dangling child
The water at the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center was much greener during the women's 10-metre platform synchronised diving final on Tuesday than during the men's competition on Monday	+31
The water at the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center was much greener during the women's 10-metre platform synchronised diving final on Tuesday than during the men's competition on Monday

The five-metre deep diving pool - which was a normal blue colour during the men's event on Monday night - appeared to be becoming more green as the event went on	+31
The five-metre deep diving pool - which was a normal blue colour during the men's event on Monday night - appeared to be becoming more green as the event went on	+31
The five-metre deep diving pool - which was a normal blue colour during the men's event on Monday night - appeared to be becoming more green as the event went on


Olympic officials at the venue in Rio de Janeiro at first said they did not know why the pool was changing colour, before blaming a 'proliferation of algae' and then a change in the water's alkilinity	+31
Olympic officials at the venue in Rio de Janeiro at first said they did not know why the pool was changing colour, before blaming a 'proliferation of algae' and then a change in the water's alkilinity

China's Lin Yue, bottom left, and Chen Aisen compete during the men's synchronised 10-metre diving final on Monday, while on Tuesday Brazil's Ingrid Oliveira and Giovanna Pedroso compete during the women's event	+31
China's Lin Yue, bottom left, and Chen Aisen compete during the men's synchronised 10-metre diving final on Monday, while on Tuesday Brazil's Ingrid Oliveira and Giovanna Pedroso compete during the women's event	+31
China's Lin Yue, bottom left, and Chen Aisen compete during the men's synchronised 10-metre diving final on Monday, while on Tuesday Brazil's Ingrid Oliveira and Giovanna Pedroso compete during the women's event

Nathaniel Storey, a microbiologist from the University of Reading, told MailOnline: 'There are two main possibilities for the green colour of the diving pool – one is from algae, the other is due to copper in the water.

DIVING RESULTS: Women's Synchronised 10m Platform on Tuesday
1 China Ruolin Chen & Huixia Liu 354.00

2 Malaysia Jun Hoong Cheong  & Pandelela Rinong Pamg 344.34 

3 Canada Meaghan Benfeito & Roseline Filion 336.18

4 North Korea Kuk Hyang Kim & Mi Rae Kim 322.44 

5 Great Britain Tonia Couch & Lois Toulson 319.44

6 Mexico Paola Espinosa & Alejandra Orozco 304.08

7 United States Amelia Cozad & Jessica Parratto 301.02

8 Brazil Ingrid Oliveira & Giovanna Pedroso 280.98

'If the pools aren't adequately treated then an algal bloom can form… Algal spores can be brought in by wind and rain. 

 'The best way to stop algae is to prevent it in the first place by maintaining a good pool sanitising regime.

'Treatment is more difficult as time goes on but requires either 'shocking' the water with high levels of chlorine, although some algae can be resistant to lower levels of chlorine, or the use of specific algaecidal agents.'

He added: 'The green algae in pools is unlikely to be harmful in itself, but would instead appear to indicate that the treatment regime in place is inadequate. Therefore the concern would be that other microorganisms that could cause disease could be present.' 

Dave Richards, head of communications for the British swimming teams, confirmed: 'Our athletes competed in the venue yesterday without issue.' 


Viewers turned to Twitter on Tuesday night to express their confusion with the hashtag #poolgate.

The diving pool at #Rio2016 looks like a pond it's SO green. Wasn't that colour yesterday,' Julie Webber tweeted.

Tom O'Connor wrote: 'Does anyone else think the rather green water at the Rio diving pool looks vile?'

Robert Devine joked: 'Olympic diving pool is green due to a reaction with the chemicals and suntan lotion. Happened to our holiday pool #Turkey1999.' 

Steve Ellul joked: 'That reminds me... Pea and Mint Soup for dinner. #Rio2016 #olympicdiving #greenpool'ue pool on Monday.

Concerns were raised before the Olympics about the quality and cleanliness of the water being used for the rowing and sailing events - but not the pools.  


It was almost impossible to spot the divers as they swam back to the surface of the murky water after diving in	+31
It was almost impossible to spot the divers as they swam back to the surface of the murky water after diving in

Tom Daley and Dan Goodfellow won bronze in the men's synchronised diving on Monday when the water was blue, left, but on Tuesday Amy Cozad and Jessica Parratto of the US dove into a far greener pool	+31
Tom Daley and Dan Goodfellow won bronze in the men's synchronised diving on Monday when the water was blue, left, but on Tuesday Amy Cozad and Jessica Parratto of the US dove into a far greener pool	+31
Tom Daley and Dan Goodfellow won bronze in the men's synchronised diving on Monday when the water was blue, left, but on Tuesday Amy Cozad and Jessica Parratto of the US dove into a far greener pool



Read more: http://www.dailymail.co.uk/news/article-3736024/Now-Rio-diving-pool-SHUTS-water-goes-green-Tom-Daley-tweets-hope-means-haven-t-diving-bad.html#ixzz5GpxeQ3dI 
Follow us: @MailOnline on Twitter | DailyMail on Facebook

Diving pool at Rio Olympics mysteriously turns green
  
39 Photos The water of the diving pool at right appears a murky green, in stark contrast to the pool's previous day's color and also that of the clear blue water in the second pool for water polo at the venue as divers train in the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Tuesday, Aug. 9, 2016.  MATT DUNHAM, AP
Share  Tweet  Reddit  Flipboard  Email
RIO DE JANEIRO -- Green, not gold, was the color of the day at the Olympic diving venue.

The divers at the 2016 Rio Olympics were landing in pristine, well-maintained, crystal-clear blue water on Monday.

Well, a lot can change in a day, as CBSSports.com reported.

During Tuesday's competition, many noticed something ... different ... about the water.

View image on TwitterView image on Twitter

David Common
✔
@davidcommon
 Why is the synchro dive pool green? The one next to it looks normal. #Rio2016 #cbc

12:44 PM - Aug 9, 2016
26
34 people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Sure, China won its third consecutive gold medal on Tuesday, but the buzz was about the color of the water in the diving pool -- a murky green.

That was in stark contrast to the pool's light blue color the previous day and also that of the clear water in the second pool used for the water polo competition at Maria Lenk Aquatic Center.

British diver Tom Daley, who earned bronze in men's synchronized 10-meter on Monday, tweeted a photo of the two pools next to each other and captioned it, "Ermmm...what happened?!"

View image on Twitter
View image on Twitter

Tom Daley
✔
@TomDaley1994
 Ermmm...what happened?!

12:07 PM - Aug 9, 2016
13.8K
6,171 people are talking about this
Twitter Ads info and privacy
Water quality has been a major issue surrounding the Rio de Janeiro Olympics, but in the ocean and lagoons, not the pools.

A statement from Olympic organizers said water tests were conducted and there was no risk to athletes. They couldn't explain the color change, but said it's being investigated.

"We don't know exactly what happened," organizing committee spokesman Mario Andrada said. "And we don't know yet why the pool changed colors.

ap16222823427184.jpg 
The water of the diving pool appears a murky green, in stark contrast to the pool's previous day's color and also that of the clear blue water in the second pool for water polo at the venue as divers train in the Maria Lenk Aquatic Center at the 2016 Summer Olympics in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, Tuesday, Aug. 9, 2016. MATT DUNHAM, AP
"If it were green and yellow, we would know it was a patriotic thing," Andrada joked, referring to Brazil's national colors. "We did test the water using the same parameters we do every day, and the results were exactly the same as we got when the pool was blue."

Canada team leader Mitch Geller suspected the cause was algae that multiplied quickly in the day's warm and sunny conditions.

 USA women's gymnastics team takes home gold 
Play VIDEO
USA women's gymnastics team takes home gold
"Everybody was scratching their heads going, 'What's going on?'" he said. "I think that the filter is busted, but I'm not sure. It's not really dangerous. It's not like it's toxic or dirty or any of that. It seemed to get worse over the course of the competition."

The kale-colored water wasn't just a cosmetic nuisance; it was so dark that divers couldn't see the bottom of the pool.

"They're used to seeing the water," Geller said. "The visuals are really, really important in diving."

Chen Ruolin, who teamed to win gold with Liu Huixia, said it didn't affect them.

Paola Espinosa of Mexico, competing in her fourth Olympics, noticed the pool getting increasingly darker throughout the six-round competition. But she said the water didn't smell or affect her skin.

"I haven't seen anything like it before," Espinosa said. "But it's Brazil and everything is green down here, so maybe it was a decoration to make it look pretty."

 Rio Olympics: Day 4 
39 PHOTOS
Rio Olympics: Day 4
American Jessica Parratto wears contacts and said the water didn't burn her eyes.

Bronze medalists Meaghan Benfeito and Roseline Filion of Canada tried not to laugh as they gazed at the water from atop the 33-foot tower. They liked that the dark green color offered a helpful contrast with the blue sky.

"The only thing we said is don't open your mouth in the water, just in case," Benfeito said.

Geller said a Canadian pool expert was coming in Wednesday and he would offer to help Rio organizers chemically treat the water if there's a problem with the filter.

"I don't know what it's going to look like tomorrow," he said. "I hope it's not a swamp."