Roman Engagement and Wedding Rings: Joining Hands and Hearts
    
The use of engagement rings and wedding rings are common in Western culture to indicate a person’s relationship status. This tradition may be traced back to ancient times, in particular, to the Roman period. Whilst these rings have their origins in either ancient Egypt or ancient Greece, it was under the Romans that detailed legal requirements for engagements, weddings, and divorce were first instituted. Therefore, we have an idea of how wedding rings functioned in ancient Rome, and how they fit into the customs of that society.

Legalities of Roman Marriage and Engagement Rings
In ancient Rome, a marriage would have been called justae nuptiae , justum matrionium or ligitimum matrimonium . Marriages had to conform to Roman law. The term connubium, for instance, denotes the legal right to get married, and this was a requirement before people could wed. Not everyone had connubium. Such individuals include people who were already married, eunuchs, and couples within the bounds of certain blood relationships. There were also other laws governing marriage in ancient Rome, including the acquisition of parental consent before a marriage, and a minimum age for marriage (12 for females and 14 for males).

Fragment from the front of a sarcophagus showing a Roman marriage ceremony.
Fragment from the front of a sarcophagus showing a Roman marriage ceremony. ( CC BY SA 4.0 ) A Roman woman should receive both engagement and wedding rings as part of marriage law.

Given that marriage in ancient Rome was something that required strict adherence to law, it may not be surprising that it was also regarded as a contract. The giving of engagement rings in ancient Rome may be seen in this light, i.e. as a public marker that a contract has been made between the couple, as well as between their families. In addition, Roman engagement rings indicated that a woman was about to pass from the ownership of one man (her father) to another (her future husband). Therefore, only women wore engagement rings in ancient Rome.

Why Do Couples Exchange Rings with Vows? The Elusive Ancient Origins of Wedding Rings
Magical Rings and Their Mystical Powers
Putting a Price on Marriage: The Long-standing Custom of Dowries
A Roman gold ring from the 3rd century AD depicting the figure of Cupid (“desire” –god of love) holding a ball, one leg on a rock. Walters Art Museum.

A Roman gold ring from the 3rd century AD depicting the figure of Cupid (“desire” –god of love) holding a ball, one leg on a rock. Walters Art Museum. ( CC0)

Two Rings and Two Symbols for Marriage
Women in ancient Roman society were given two wedding rings, an iron one and a gold one. The first of these was worn at home, whilst the second was worn in public to impress people. Iron was chosen as the material for these rings as it was meant to symbolize strength and permanence.

Roman Key wedding ring. This ring was made of iron and worn by the wife.

Roman Key wedding ring. This ring was made of iron and worn by the wife. (Rama/ CC BY SA 2.0 fr )

Gold was another material used by the Romans to make wedding rings - as a symbol of wealth. Whilst sumptuary laws prohibited the lower classes from wearing gold rings, they were difficult to enforce, and even slaves were recorded to have plated their iron rings with gold.

An elaborate gold and onyx Roman wedding ring from the 3rd century.

An elaborate gold and onyx Roman wedding ring from the 3rd century. ( Argyor)

Gold wedding rings became especially prominent from the 3rd and 4th centuries AD onwards. During this period, gold rings became more elaborate and sumptuous, an indication of an owner’s wealth, as well as a craftsman’s skill. The most common type of ring associated with Roman marriages was the ‘fede’ ring, which had a design showing a pair of clasped hands, or an entwined couple.

Roman gold fede rings from the 2nd or 3rd century. The clasped hands design was popular for Roman wedding rings.

Roman gold fede rings from the 2nd or 3rd century. The clasped hands design was popular for Roman wedding rings. ( CC BY NC SA 4.0 )

Passing On Marriage Traditions
These rings have remained popular over the centuries, and are still part of the engagement and wedding ring traditions of Italy today. It may be added that the Romans believed a nerve ran directly from the fourth finger (the ring finger) of the left hand directly to the heart. Due to this, wedding rings are worn on this finger, a tradition that has also continued till today.   

The Ring of Senicianus: One Ring to Rule Them All
Ghost Marriages: Love For the Living and the Deceased
The ancient fairy tale of Cupid and Psyche, where love endures against all odds
The Romans were also the first people who had their engagement / wedding rings engraved. One example of this practice can be seen on a ‘fede’ ring displayed in the British Museum in London. The words ‘ Te amo parum ’ were found to have been engraved on this ring. This phrase meant ‘I love you too little’ or ‘I do not love you enough’. One sweet interpretation of this message is that the giver of the ring is unable to love his beloved enough because it would have been impossible to love her as much as she deserved.

Roman gold fede rings from the 2nd or 3rd century. The clasped hands design was popular for Roman wedding rings.

Gold finger-ring set with a nicolo intaglio in the form of a truncated pyramid, engraved with a palm-branch and inscribed in Latin: "I love you too little" (Te am parum). ( CC BY-NC-SA 4.0 ) This is one example of a Roman fede ring.

Top image: A Roman Ring with Linked Hands – this was a popular design for Roman wedding rings. Source: West Semitic Research Project/ University of Southern Carolina

THE HISTORY OF THE WEDDING BAND
I have been intrigued by the history and symbolism behind jewelry for even longer than I have been making it.  Rings in particular are loaded with significance. Since ancient Egypt rings have been know to be the most intimate pieces that we wear. Throughout history rings were used as personal talismans, in business transactions, as symbols of status, and of course to pledge your love to another.  The story of the wedding ring does not have one clear path; it changes with each religion and country's view of marriage. Some rings strictly marked the legal contract of marriage, while others were clearly crafted in the name of true love.  But this shift isn’t chronological like we might expect, instead it ebbs and flows in different times and different places. This is a topic I have been reading about for years and I wanted to share the story as I know it. 

ANCIENT EGYPT, GREECE, & ROME
  Fade Intaglio Ring, OMONOIA (harmony) Gold and carved onyx, 3rd Century, Roman. Source: Unknown  
Fade Intaglio Ring, OMONOIA (harmony) Gold and carved onyx, 3rd Century, Roman. Source: Unknown

  Three Winged Putti Forging Arrow Heads.&nbsp;Gold and carved cameo, 1st century. Source:  Met Museum of Art   
Three Winged Putti Forging Arrow Heads. Gold and carved cameo, 1st century. Source: Met Museum of Art

Almost 5000 years ago, ancient Egypt was the first known culture where people would exchange "rings of love" often made of woven reeds or leather. It is said that the Egyptians saw the ring, a circle, as a powerful symbol. The band with no end representing eternal life and love, and its opening representing a gateway to worlds unknown. Rings were highly regarded in their culture, especially scarabs and signets.

Signet rings, used as a personal signature, continued to be used by the Greeks and Romans. It is said that the signet inspired some of the earliest known betrothal rings in Rome. Yes, in Egypt they exchanged rings as gifts of devotion, then in Greece they gave rings to lovers featuring Eros the god of love or his cherubs. But it is believed that it was the Romans who linked the ring to marriage. Most commonly with a "fede" ring, depicting two hands clasping in love or agreement/ dextrarum iunctio.  These designs could be made in solid gold or carved in stone, like a signet, often in cornelian, aquamarine, garnet, or onyx. 

 
LOVERS HEADS
  GOLD MARRIAGE RING, Gold, &nbsp;6th–7th century,&nbsp;Byzantine. &nbsp;Source:  Met Museum of Art   
GOLD MARRIAGE RING, Gold,  6th–7th century, Byzantine.  Source: Met Museum of Art

 

 

As time went on the Romans began personalizing wedding rings, shifting from the fede to carvings of the couples themselves. This carried over to the Byzantine Empire in the Middle Ages when most rings were carved with the faces or full figure of the betrothed couple. Once Christianity became the Empire's official religion the couple was often depicted with Jesus or a cross between them, blessing their marriage.

 

 
 

FEDE RINGS
  Fede Ring in Gold, 16th century. &nbsp;Source:  Met Museum of Art   
Fede Ring in Gold, 16th century.  Source: Met Museum of Art

 

Fede rings, in different styles, were popular in Europe for over a thousand years. They resurfaced in the 1100s and lasted for centuries. Over the years they became much more intricate with interlocking bands (see gimmle rings below) and ornate enameling.  Most commonly still worn today is the Irish Claddagh ring, two hands holding a heart with a crown. The Claddagh ring was first designed in the 16th century, thirteen centuries after the original fede rings of Rome.  

POSY RINGS
  RENAISSANCE POSY RING “PROVIDENCE DIVINE HATH MADE THEE MINE” Gold, 17th Century,&nbsp;British &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp; &nbsp;  Source:  Met Museum of Art   
RENAISSANCE POSY RING “PROVIDENCE DIVINE HATH MADE THEE MINE” Gold, 17th Century, British                Source: Met Museum of Art

16th Century
16th Century
17th Century
17th Century
 

A posy (or posie) is a short verse, often from a poem, inscribed on a ring. Posy rings were first commonly worn in the 15th century. In their beginning they had bold designs and were inscribed with words on the outside of the bands.  As time went on the designs of the bands became simpler, but the inscriptions became more personal. This forced goldsmiths to advance their techniques and learn to engrave on the inside of the rings to keep these messages private and close to the wearer they.  This shows a shift, from marriage often being an agreement between families when an ornate ring signified a more profitable arrangement.  To marriages founded in love, with simple rings formed from gold coins, bearing inscriptions like “Love me and leave me not” and “Two bodies, one heart.”

Today many couples who make their rings in my workshop want to make sure that their rings are full of meaning, and wonder if they should have “more than just a plain band.” But in knowing the history of the simple band you can see that it already is rich with its own significance. Sometimes less really does say more.

GIMMEL RINGS
   RENAISSANCE GIMMEL RING WITH MEMENTO MORI,&nbsp;  17th Cen, German.&nbsp;Source:  Met Museum of Art    
RENAISSANCE GIMMEL RING WITH MEMENTO MORI, 17th Cen, German. Source: Met Museum of Art

  RENAISSANCE GIMMEL RING W/ MEMENTO MORI,&nbsp; 17th Cen, German. &nbsp; Source:  Met Museum of Art    
RENAISSANCE GIMMEL RING W/ MEMENTO MORI, 17th Cen, German.   Source: Met Museum of Art

 

The gimmel ring,  like a small puzzle, was popular in the 15th through the 17th century.  While posy rings became simpler over time, gimmel rings became more intricate and complex as goldsmithing techniques advanced. Gimmel rings consist of 2-3 interlocking bands, wonderfully symbolic in that each band is free yet must remain together to create the whole. With early gimmel rings, the bride and groom would each wear a band leading up to the wedding day when they would be put together to symbolize the joining of two people. Many gimmel rings housed beautiful cut stones and ornate carved features highlighted with colorful enamel. Some of the common symbols in gimmel rings were the fede hands, forget-me-not flowers, and red hearts. Later designs also included a touch of memento mori, featuring a skeleton and a baby, symbolizing life and death, and eternal love beyond this life. 

 

JEWISH MARRIAGE RINGS
 

 Jewish Marriage Ring, Gold and enamel, 17th century 
Jewish Marriage Ring, Gold and enamel, 17th century

 Jewish Marriage Ring, Gold and enamel, 18th century 
Jewish Marriage Ring, Gold and enamel, 18th century

 

It is a long standing Jewish tradition that the wedding band must be an unbroken circle of solid gold or silver representing an everlasting marriage. With no stones or details representing a marriage free of distraction or complication. The minimum value is said to be a penny (pe’rutah) this low value represents that their intentions are true and not driven by money or false pretense. The lesser known is the past tradition of the Jewish ceremonial marriage ring. Dating back at least to the 10th century and used through the 19th century, becoming more intricate over time with filigree and enamel. Often the roof, thought to represent the couples' home or temple, opened like a locket to reveal a Hebrew inscription. Since these rings were so ornate they were most likely shared for all of the weddings within a town. There are many different opinions on the meaning and purpose behind these ornate rings that grooms offered their bride during the ceremony, unfortunately there is very little documentation preserved about these rings.

DIAMOND RINGS
  Renaissance Diamond Ring,  Gold and diamond, &nbsp;16th century. &nbsp;Source:  Met Museum of Art &nbsp;   
Renaissance Diamond Ring, Gold and diamond, 16th century.  Source: Met Museum of Art  

 Illustration from Costanzo Sforza and Camilla D'Aragona's wedding depicting the diamond ring holding up the two burning torches. 
Illustration from Costanzo Sforza and Camilla D'Aragona's wedding depicting the diamond ring holding up the two burning torches.

Today many people know De Beers’ to be behind the diamond ring, while it is true that they popularized it as an engagement ring, diamonds had indeed already been used in love rings for several centuries. The first known diamond ring was actually from the late 100sAD found in Rome, an uncut diamond ring belonging to a young girl. However there is no way to know it if was a gift of love, a symbol of status or any other type of ring. Early on it was known that diamonds were strong and considered valuable, but it wasn't until many centuries later that they had the tools to cut them and reveal their sparkle. 

In the 15th century a gift of jewelry was often sent from the father of the bride to father of the groom, proposing the intent to marry off his daughter. It was not uncommon for this gift to be a diamond ring, in a way, marking the beginning of the diamond engagement ring. 
The first documented diamond betrothal ring was in 1475 at the wedding of Costanzo Sforza and Camilla D'Aragona in Italy. Their wedding poem read “Two wills, two hearts, two passions are bonded in one marriage by a diamond”
By the 17th century diamonds were showing up more often in wedding and engagement rings. At this time the diamond could be given from the man to woman or woman to man as a pledge of love. In the Georgian era of the 18th century when simple posy rings were still widely used as wedding bands it became popular for women to wear 'keeper' rings on either side of her wedding band to accent and protect it. These rings were commonly made of rose cut diamonds set in silver and gold, similar to today's eternity band.

  'Keeper' Ring, gold, silver, rose cut diamonds. 18th Century. &nbsp;Source: Unknown   
'Keeper' Ring, gold, silver, rose cut diamonds. 18th Century.  Source: Unknown

Diamond engagement rings grew in popularity over the 19th century, but did not become the norm until De Beers' launched their "Diamond is Forever" campagne (by Frances Gerety) in the mid 1940's.  Today a diamond engagement ring is still the most common choice, however many couples now opt for unique styles, vintage pieces, rough diamonds, or non traditional stones. Other couples are interested in more eco friendly options including lab grown diamonds and moissanites, or recycled diamonds.  Some women decide to forgo the engagement ring all together, while some men now choose to wear engagement rings along with their partners. Historically this is such an interesting time since people have started creating their own traditions. 

THE RING FINGER
  The Betrothed Couple by Lucas van Leyden  
The Betrothed Couple by Lucas van Leyden

 

 

Throughout history while the ideas of marriage changed along with the styles of the rings that represented it, the ring finger also changed. Weddings rings have been documented to be worn on every finger, even the thumb. Today it is most commonly worn on the forth finger of the left hand, but some countries and cultures do it differently. Most notably moving the engagement ring to the right hand after the wedding or the reverse. But how did the forth finger become known as the ring finger? Well that goes back to the Egyptians again (...or early Romans depending on who you ask.)  They are said to have believed that the forth finger had a vein or nerve that connected directly to the heart. And while there is not a bit of scientific evidence to support it, we returned to that tradition out of pure sentiment. Which might just be my favorite part of the wedding ring's story. 

O little ring that art going to encircle my fair mistress’s finger, thou that no value hast save the giver’s love that goes with thee, be charming in her sight. May she with delight receive thee and straightway slip thee on her finger. May thou fit her, as well as she fits me; and may thy circle, nor over-tight nor yet too loose, softly gird her finger.

Happy ring, thou wilt be touched by her I love. Ah me, already I begin to envy my own gift’s happy lot…Go forth, little gift, upon thy way, and may my mistress see in thee the symbol of my changeless love.

~Ovid (43 BC–AD 17/18)

Excerpt from Amores, Book II, Elegy XV

(Translated by J. Lewis May, 1930)

Roman statue

Wedding ring traditions in Rome continued—to some extent—the established customs of the Egyptians and Greeks. However, the Romans were the first to institute detailed legal requirements for prenuptial agreements, weddings, and divorce. A Roman marriage was called Justae Nuptiae, Justum Matrionium, or Ligitimum Matrimonium because it conformed to Roman law.

To marry in ancient Rome, you had to have a legal right to marry, or connubium. If you were already married, or if you wished to marry within the bounds of certain blood and legal relationships, you did not have connubium. If you were a eunuch or person who, for some reason, would or could not achieve puberty, you would not be allowed to marry. Any couple wishing to marry must have their parents consent. The bride had to be at least 12 years of age, the groom 14.

Pliny the Elder

It is in pursuance of this custom that even at the present day, an iron ring is sent by way of present to a woman when betrothed.

~Pliny the Elder (AD 23 – 79)
Naturalis Historia

Roman iron wedding ringWedding agreements or contracts were serious matters to the Romans. Once an agreement was made, failure to follow through could have severe consequences. The agreement was frequently cemented when the groom gave money or an iron ring to his intended. This ring was called the annulus pronubus or engagement ring.

After the parties had agreed to marry…a meeting of friends was sometimes held at the house of the maiden for the purpose of settling the marriage-contract…written on tablets, and signed by both parties…it appears that, at least during the imperial period, the man put a ring on the finger of his betrothed, as a pledge of his fidelity.

~William Smith
A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1859)

Terentius Neo pompeii
Terentius Neo and his wife, Fresco from Pompeii, AD 1st century

Although iron was not valued as highly as gold, an iron ring was no trifle to the Romans. Sumptuary laws also prohibited the lower classes from wearing gold rings although the laws were difficult to enforce. According to Pliny, even slaves were known to plate their iron rings with gold.

The Romans were fascinated with the phenomenon of magnetism. According to Pliny, iron rings were frequently magnetized prior to the betrothal ceremony. He also expounded on the protective and healing properties of iron: “For if a circle is traced with iron…it will preserve both infant and adult from all noxious influences…Water in which iron has been plunged at a white heat, is useful, as a potion, in many diseases, dysentery more particularly.”

Roman couple ringOn occasion, the iron wedding ring would also be set with a lodestone—an oxide of iron and a natural magnet—which symbolized the love that bound the couple together. Pliny details the wonder of the lodestone and its action on iron: “What is there in existence more inert than a piece of rigid stone? And yet, behold! Nature has here endowed stone with both sense and hands. What is there more stubborn than hard iron? Nature has, in this instance, bestowed upon it both feet and intelligence. It allows itself, in fact, to be attracted by the magnet, and, itself a metal which subdues all other elements, it precipitates itself towards the source of an influence at once mysterious and unseen. The moment the metal comes near it, it springs towards the magnet, and, as it clasps it, is held fast in the magnet’s embraces.”

intaglio hands
Roman Intaglio Ring with Clasped Hands

Over time, Roman wedding rings became increasingly elaborate. They were fabricated from gold and other precious metals, set with gemstones, and decorated with different symbols or motifs. A man and a woman, representing the betrothed couple, might be engraved on the ring. If a ship motif was used, it signified happiness or good fortune. Sometimes the rings featured engraved motifs such as the gods Mars and Venus or their son, Cupid.

The Romans, like the Egyptians and Greeks before them, wore their love or betrothal rings on the third finger of the left hand. This is because they believed this finger held a special vein, called the vena amoris, or vein of love, which was linked directly to the heart. This same finger was also called the digitus medicinalis, and it was used to stir potions and medicines in the belief that the heart would be alerted if there was poison in the mix.

Heracles knot ring
Graeco-Roman Snake Ring with Heracles Knot

The ancient Egyptians used an exceptionally strong knot created by two intertwined ropes as a healing and fertility charm. The Greeks referred to them as Heracles knots because of their affiliation with the Greek hero known for his strength, virility, and courage. The Greeks used Heracles knots as a motif in love and friendship rings, not marriage rings per se.

The Heracles (Hercules in Latin) knot was adopted by the Romans—first as a talisman and then as a wedding symbol. It was used in both wedding rings and the bride’s belt or girdle. In ancient Rome, the bride’s girdle was securely fastened with knots—a representation of her virginity. It was common for the groom to untie the knots in the post-wedding ceremony. This tradition has given us the phrase tying the knot.

Roman wedding rings featureOn the wedding-day, which in the early times was never fixed upon without consulting the auspices, the bride was dressed in a long white robe with a purple fringe or adorned with ribands. This dress was called tunica recta, and was bound round the waist with a girdle, which the husband had to untie in the evening.

 

The bride was conducted to the house of her husband in the evening…When the procession arrived at the house of the bridegroom, the door of which was adorned with garlands and flowers, the bride was carried across the threshold by pronubi, i.e., men who had only been married to one woman, that she might not knock against it with her foot, which would have been an evil omen.

 

After she had entered the house…she was placed upon a sheep-skin, and here the keys of the house were delivered into her hands.

~William Smith
A Dictionary of Greek and Roman Antiquities (1859)

Roman key ring
Roman Key Ring

If the wedding ring was costly, the bride did not wear it every day. An iron ring served as the daily substitute. Many of these iron rings featured small protrusions in the shape of keys. Although some believe the keys unlocked tiny jewel boxes, these rings were probably not functional. More likely, it symbolized a woman’s control over the keys, and therefore the valuables, of the household.

Engagement ring tradition
and its place in
Italian culture traditions
The engagement ring tradition began with ancient Roman culture.

If you want to reflect Italian heritage in your wedding, here's how to begin with Italy's engagement traditions.

Engagement ring traditions
The Roman Empire's iron engagement ring tradition
The tradition of engagement rings began in ancient Roman wedding culture but had nothing to do with either bridal fashion or love; the groom gave a ring to his bride-to-be as a public mark that a contract of engagement had been made between the two families.

Ancient Roman wedding rings2
Iron Roman wedding band. Photographed at British Museum, London.
Once given, the promise to marry became legally binding and engagement traditions meant that only death was an acceptable reason for not continuing to marriage.  For that reason the ring was a very plain, undecorated band made not of gold but of iron - a symbol of the lasting and unbreakable contract.

It was also a public sign that the woman was about to pass from the ownership of one man - her father - to another - her husband, and for that reason men did not wear any form of engagement or wedding band.

Iron in modern Italian engagement traditions
How does that translate into modern Italian culture traditions? Bridegrooms in Italy often carry a small piece of iron in their pocket to symbolise the strength of the couple's commitment to each other.

In other countries the bride is given a horseshoe which, although traditionally signifying good luck, was also an iron symbol of strength.  These days it tends to be made of card.

Engagement ring tradition :  from iron to gold
But iron rusts, and the Romans were skilled goldsmiths using advanced methods of creating beautiful ancient Roman jewelry so by the third century, plain silver and gold bands replaced iron as engagement rings. This time they symbolised not just strength but the groom's faith in his bride-to-be: she could be trusted with his wealth.

Here, ancient Italian culture traditions were closer to modern times : rings were now a symbol of a promise to marry <i>and</i> an expression of trust.

But what about love?

The engagement traditions of 'fede' rings
 Roman gold signet wedding ring
An ancient Roman
'fede' ring.
No doubt experimenting with their goldsmith craft, the ancient Romans then developed from a simple band to a more elaborate design of a gold signet design showing hands clasped, or a couple entwined.

They named this the 'Concordia' or harmony ring but the design also became known as 'fede' rings.

So the symbolism was broadened yet again and 'engagement' rings  now spoke of strength, a promise to marry, trust, harmony and 'fede', meaning a pledge of love - and in Italy today 'fede' is what a wedding ring is called.

On top of that, rings were now worn on the third finger of the left hand - Roman culture following the Egyptian belief that from that finger ran the "nerve of love" directly to the heart. 

At last, the engagement ring spoke of love.

'Fede' rings in modern Italian engagement traditions
Fede rings
Today's fede ring.
The 'fede' is still very much a part of Italian engagement ring tradition, particularly in the northern regions where it appears as either two clasped hands or two hands holding a heart.

It's used as either an engagement or wedding band and is popular in both silver and gold.

Claddagh ring
The Irish Claddagh ring.
Not just in Italy either; the famous Irish version of 'fede' rings is the Claddagh, taken directly from ancient Roman culture: two hands, holding a heart, topped with a crown symbolising loyalty. 

The Claddagh has become very popular both as a wedding and a friendship or loyalty ring.

Diamonds in engagement ring tradition
The ancient Romans loved diamonds.  They endowed them with romantic powers, believing they were splinters from falling stars that tipped the arrows of Eros, the god of love.

But despite that, and despite having free access to gems from all parts of the Roman Empire, the tradition of having a diamond in  engagement rings did not originate in ancient Roman culture. The diamond engagement ring as we know it was not seen until the Italy of the 1400s.

Engagement traditions
Italian wedding rings 
by 'Preziosi'.
Once they discovered their beauty in rings, however, Italian jewelry manufacturers embraced diamonds enthusiastically and not only engagement ring tradition, but Italian wedding customs, have used them whole-heartedly.

Modern Italian engagement rings now feature diamonds in a variety of settings, and Italian wedding rings are also often diamond set with a single stone for a man and a circle of stones (signifying eternal love) for the bride's ring.

As for ancient Roman wedding rings - they did not exist as a separate item.  The engagement band was worn by the woman as a sign of her betrothal and, later, her status as a wife.  No other ring was exchanged at ancient Roman weddings.

Translating ancient engagement ring tradition into Italian culture traditions of today
So - what should you be thinking about if you want to use some of the traditions of ancient Roman engagement traditions in your own ceremony?

Here are our suggestions:


Use a 'fede' or Claddagh as your engagement ring.  If you opt for the heart shape, make sure you wear it with the heart's point turned inwards towards your body, symbolising that your heart is taken.


Use your engagement party to give and receive your engagement band formally, as a public commitment to your promise to marry.


It is part of Italian culture traditions that, if the man's family owns a ring they leave it to their eldest son, who will give it to his fiancée as a symbol not just of love but of welcome into her new family.

So don't be offended if you're given a family heirloom as an engagement or wedding band.


It is customary in Italy to engrave the date of the marriage inside wedding rings, adding the bride’s name inside the groom’s, and his name inside hers.