Arkansas state employee who sued U.S. President Bill Clinton for sexual harassment. The Paula Jones case precipitated Clinton's impeachment in the House of Representatives and the subsequent acquittal by the Senate on February 12, 1999. Specifically, Clinton was asked under oath about Monica Lewinsky in the Jones suit, denied having ever had sexual relations with her, and was accused of perjury after evidence of sexual contact was exposed. The Jones lawsuit also led to a landmark legal precedent by the U.S. Supreme Court which ruled that a sitting U.S. president is not exempt from civil litigation for acts committed outside of public office.

Jones's suit was dismissed as lacking legal merit prior to Clinton's impeachment and the exposure of the Lewinsky affair. But in August 1998 Clinton's relationship with Lewinsky, and compelling evidence that he had lied about it under oath in the Jones suit, was brought to light. At that point Jones appealed the ruling, and her appeal gained traction following Clinton's admission to having an affair with Monica Lewinsky in August 1998

On appeal, Clinton agreed to an out-of-court settlement, paying Jones and her lawyers $850,000 to drop the suit; the vast majority of this money was used to pay Jones's legal fees. Clinton's lawyer said that the President made the settlement only so he could end the lawsuit for good and move on with his life.[3] Jones and her lawyers have said the payment is evidence of Clinton's guilt.

Jones continues to maintain that Clinton sexually harassed her. Clinton continues to deny it.

Early life
Jones was born in Lonoke, Arkansas. She was the daughter of a minister in the Church of the Nazarene and raised within that congregation.[6]

Jones v. Clinton
According to Jones's account, on May 8, 1991, she was escorted to Clinton's (then Governor of Arkansas) room in the Excelsior Hotel (now Little Rock Marriott) by State Troopers in Little Rock, Arkansas, where he propositioned and exposed himself to her. She claimed she kept quiet about the incident until 1994, when a David Brock story in the American Spectator magazine printed an account. Jones filed a sexual harassment suit against Clinton on May 6, 1994, two days before the expiration of the three-year statute of limitations, and sought $750,000 in damages.

Initial lawsuit
Jones was initially represented by Gilbert Davis and Joseph Cammarata, two Washington, D.C.-area lawyers. Susan Carpenter-McMillan, a California conservative commentator, became her press spokesperson. Carpenter-McMillan wasted no time bringing the issue to the press, calling Clinton "un-American", a "liar", and a "philanderer" on Meet the Press, Crossfire, Equal Time, Larry King Live, Today, The Geraldo Rivera Show, Burden of Proof, Hannity & Colmes, Talkback Live, and other shows. "I do not respect a man who cheats on his wife, and exposes his penis to a stranger", she said.[11]

Judge Susan Webber Wright granted President Clinton's motion for summary judgment, ruling that Jones could not demonstrate that she had suffered any damages. As to the claim of intentional infliction of emotional distress, Wright ruled that Jones failed to show that Clinton's actions constituted "outrageous conduct" as required of the tort, alongside not showing proof of damages caused by distress.[12] Jones appealed the dismissal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit, where, at oral argument, two of the three judges on the panel appeared sympathetic to her arguments.[3] Clinton and his defense team then challenged Jones' right to bring a civil lawsuit against a sitting president for an incident that occurred prior to the defendant's becoming president. The Clinton defense team took the position that the trial should be delayed until the president was no longer in office, because the job of the president is unique and does not allow him to take time away from it to deal with a private civil lawsuit. The case went through the courts, eventually reaching the Supreme Court on January 13, 1997. On May 27, the Supreme Court unanimously ruled against Clinton, and allowed the lawsuit to proceed. Clinton dismissed Jones's story and agreed to move on with the lawsuit.

On August 29, 1997, Jones' attorneys Davis and Cammarata asked to resign from the case, believing the settlement offer they had secured, which Jones refused, was the appropriate way to end the case.[14] In September, Judge Wright accepted their request.

Jones was then represented by the Rutherford Institute, a conservative legal organization, and by a Dallas law firm. Carpenter-McMillan continued to serve as Jones' spokesperson. In December 1997, Jones reduced the damages sought in her suit against Clinton to $525,000 and agreed to remove Clinton's co-defendant and former bodyguard, Danny Ferguson, from the suit.

On April 2, 1998, before the case could reach trial,[15] Judge Wright granted President Clinton's motion for dismissal, ruling that Jones could not show that she had suffered any damages.[15] Jones soon appealed the dismissal to the United States Court of Appeals for the Eighth Circuit.[3]

Conclusion of case
On November 13, 1998, Clinton settled with Jones for $850,000, the entire amount of her claim, without an apology, in exchange for her agreement to drop the appeal. Robert S. Bennett, Clinton's attorney, still maintained that Jones's claim was baseless and that Clinton only settled so he could end the lawsuit and move on with his life.[3] In March 1999, Judge Wright ruled that Jones would get only $200,000 from the settlement and that the rest of the money would pay for her legal expenses.[16]

Before the end of the entire litigation, her marriage broke apart. She also appeared in the news media to show the results of a makeover [17] and rhinoplasty paid for by a donor.[18]

In April 1999, Judge Wright found Clinton in civil contempt of court for misleading testimony in the Jones case. She ordered Clinton to pay $1,202 to the court and an additional $90,000 to Jones's lawyers for expenses incurred,[19][20][21] far less than the $496,000 that the lawyers originally requested.[21]

Wright then referred Clinton's conduct to the Arkansas Bar Association for disciplinary action, and on January 19, 2001, the day before Clinton left the office of president, he entered into an agreement with the Arkansas Bar and Independent Counsel Robert Ray under which Clinton was stripped of his license to practice law in Arkansas for a period of five years.[22][23] His fine was paid from a fund raised for his legal expenses.

Penthouse Magazine
In December 1994, federal judge Peter K. Leisure ordered Penthouse Magazine not to distribute semi-nude photographs of Paula Jones that had been taken by her boyfriend Mike Turner. Owner Bob Guccione argued that the photos counted under "illustrations of newsworthy articles" and called the order prohibiting distribution of the magazine an instance of prior restraint, a position reflected by several respected professors of law; he also said the issue was already out in the hands of distributors.[24] This temporary restraining order was lifted two days later.[25] She later posed for photos illustrating an article, "The Perils of Paula Jones" in the December 2000 issue, citing the pressures of a large tax bill and two young sons to support.[26][27]

Lewinsky scandal connection
Jones's lawyers decided to show to the court a pattern of behavior by Clinton that involved his allegedly repeatedly becoming sexually involved with state or government employees. Jones's lawyers therefore subpoenaed women they suspected Clinton had had affairs with, one of whom was Monica Lewinsky. In his deposition for the Jones lawsuit, Clinton denied having "sexual relations" with Monica Lewinsky. Based on testimony provided by Linda Tripp, which identified the existence of a blue dress with Clinton's semen on it, Kenneth Starr concluded that Clinton's sworn testimony was false and perjurious.

During the deposition in the Jones case, Clinton was asked, "Have you ever had sexual relations with Monica Lewinsky, as that term is defined in Deposition Exhibit 1, as modified by the Court?" The judge ordered that Clinton be given an opportunity to review the definition. It said that "a person engages in sexual relations when the person knowingly engages in or causes contact with the genitalia, anus, groin, breast, inner thigh, or buttocks of any person with an intent to arouse or gratify the sexual desire of any person".[28][29][30] Clinton flatly denied having sexual relations with Lewinsky.[31] Later, at the Starr Grand Jury, Clinton stated that he believed the definition of sexual relations agreed upon for the Jones deposition excluded his receiving oral sex. It was upon the basis of this statement that the perjury charges in his impeachment were drawn up. Clinton was impeached by the House of Representatives on December 19, 1998, on charges of perjury and obstruction of justice. But despite Republican control of the Senate, Republicans were unable to muster the required two-thirds supermajority to convict or even simple majority, with 50 Senators voting guilty on the obstruction charge and 45 senators voting guilty on the perjury charge.
 
After four and a half years of litigation and name-calling, the case of Paul Corbin Jones versus William Jefferson Clinton ended in the polite exchange of a four-page fax.CBS News Correspondent Phil Jones reports.
Clinton attorney Robert Bennett was, at first, skeptical of terms of the settlement proposal: $850,000, no apology, no strings, and Mrs. Jones walks away from her sexual harraassment lawsuit. Twice before she walked away from a settlement deal as pen hovered above paper.

"I want it in writing," Bennett told her lawyer Thursday.

"The number didn't really make any difference," said Bill McMillan, a California personal injury lawyer and a Jones family friend. Around 4:30 p.m. EST Friday, four pages crowned with Bennett's signature rolled off McMillan's fax machine.

In New York, a relieved Mrs. Jones, just finished with a paid taping of TV's tabloid Inside Edition, burst into tears at first word of Friday's settlment.

As part of Bennett's condition for written confirmation, McMillan signed a letter Friday morning promising that Mrs. Jones would dissociate herself from the $1 million offer from real estate tycoon Abe Hirschfeld earlier this year.

Susan McMillen, who has been at Jones' side as her friend and advisor, was asked if Jones considers a settlement a victory. The answer was, "You bet."

Jones has legal bills of nearly $2.5 million, but lawyers have agreed to settle for less. With the Jones case gone, an army of White House lawyers could now focus exclusively on this week's House impeachment proceedings. "The president doesn't want to spend one more minute" on the Jones case, Bennett said.

"Paula is very pleased that it's finally over," said her lawyer.

A Clinton lawyer also confirmed the deal.


Our Full Coverage
of this Ongoing Story

Jones' and her lawyers planned a Monday news conference in Los Angeles.
Jones alleged that Mr. Clinton, as Arkansas governor, made a crude advance in a room at a Little Rock hotel. Mr. Clinton has denied her accusation, and her lawsuit was dismissed April 1. An appeal of that dismissal was pending.

Jones had initially demanded $1 million and an apology from the president. President Clinton's lawyers made it clear no apology would be forthcoming.

Jones, who was a clerk for the Arkansas state government when the alleged encounter occurred in 1991, contended in her lawsuit that her rejection of Mr. Clinton's advance later affected her job opportunities.

U.S. District Judge Susan Webber Wright ruled on April 1, that Jones' allegations, even if true, did not add up to a "hostile environment" case of sexul harassment.

Jones' lawyers had appealed that ruling to the 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals.

It was Mr. Clinton's sworn deposition for the Jones case that led to the impeachment hearings that begin next week in the House Judiciary Committee.

Under questioning by Jones' lawyers in January, President Clinton denied having sexual relations with former White House intern Monica Lewinsky. Independent Counsel Kenneth Starr alleges that Mr. Clinton lied under oath in the Jones deposition and otherwise obstructed justice by trying to keep his affair with Lewinsky secret.
 
 

