
Wedding and Engagement Rings
A wedding ring or wedding band is a finger ring that indicates that its wearer is married.[1] It is usually forged from metal, and traditionally is forged of gold or another precious metal.[2]

The earliest examples of wedding rings are from Ancient Egypt. Western customs for wedding rings can be traced to ancient Rome and Greece, and were transmitted to the present through Christendom in Europe, which adapted the ancient customs.

Depending on culture, a wedding ring is typically worn on the base of the left or right ring finger. Many spouses wear their wedding rings day and night, causing an indentation in the skin that is visible even when the ring is removed.

Contents 
1	History
1.1	Historical styles
1.1.1	Gimmel rings
1.1.2	Poesy rings
1.1.3	Other styles
1.1.4	Limited gold content in the United Kingdom
1.2	Double-ring ceremony
2	Compositions and styles
3	Religion
3.1	Wedding ceremony customs
3.2	Post-wedding customs
3.3	Wedding ceremonies that use rings
4	See also
5	References
History

Marriage Ring with Scenes from the Life of Christ, ca. 6th century, Walters Art Museum
It is commonly believed that the first examples of wedding rings were found in ancient Egypt. Relics dating to 6,000 years ago, including papyrus scrolls, are evidence of the exchange of braided rings of hemp or reeds between spouses. Ancient Egypt considered the circle to be a symbol of eternity, and the ring served to signify the perpetual love of the spouses. This was also the origin of the custom of wearing the wedding ring on the ring finger of the left hand, because the ancient Egyptians believed that this finger enclosed a special vein that was connected directly to the heart,[3] denominated in Latin the "Vena amoris".

The Western traditions of wedding rings can be traced to ancient Rome and Greece, and were first associated with the marital dowry and later with a promise of fidelity. The modern exchange of rings derived from the customs of Europe in the Middle Ages as part of Christendom.[4] In the United States, wedding rings were initially only worn by wives, but became customary for both husbands and wives during the 20th century.[5]

Historical styles
Gimmel rings

Gimmel ring with the hoop opened, in the British Museum

Wedding ring of groom and a bride with shadow in form of heart - symbolic sense of love
During the 16th and 17th centuries, European husbands bestowed a gimmel ring upon their wives. Similar to the puzzle ring, the gimmel ring consisted of two interlocking bands. The bride and groom both wore one of these bands after their engagement, and the two bands were reunited during the wedding ceremony. Subsequently, the wife wore the combined ring.[3]

Poesy rings
The poesy ring was a style of ring that was popular during the Renaissance era. It was a band of sterling silver inscribed with a poem or "poesy".[3]

Other styles
Different cultures used many other historical styles of wedding ring. For example, see the image below of the Byzantine ring depicting Christ uniting bride and groom. Also, in the Middle East the puzzle ring was a historical custom: this ring consisted of several pieces that joined together into a cohesive band when worn properly. The object of this style of ring was to render it very difficult to put on the finger properly such that, if the wife removed it, her husband would know. The fede ring, being a band consisting of two hands clasped in betrothal, is another historical custom of Europe that ostensibly dates from antiquity.

Limited gold content in the United Kingdom
In 1942 during the Second World War, British wartime restrictions on the manufacture of jewelry resulted in "utility" wedding rings that were limited to a maximum mass of two pennyweights, being slightly heavier than 3 grams, and were forged of 9 carat gold rather than the traditional 22 carat.[6] The Regional Assayer Office hallmarked these rings, which guaranteed their gold content and compliance with the wartime regulations with a special utility mark adjacent to the mark for the year on the inside of the band; the hallmark resembled a capital "U" with the bottom curve absent or two parentheses enclosing a space, i. e., "( )".

Double-ring ceremony
The double-ring ceremony describes the exchange of wedding rings by and for both spouses. In several European nations such as the Nordic countries, it is common to exchange plain engagement rings of the same form for both sexes, and typically, an additional, more precious, and bejeweled wedding ring is given to the bride. In the nuptials, the groom's ring becomes a wedding ring also, and can be bestowed anew by the bride as a part of the wedding ceremony. The engagement is commonly a matter of agreement between the two, and the wedding rings are chosen together. Both engagement and wedding rings are worn on the left hand, the bride having both rings together. Occasionally, the groom receives a separate wedding ring. In Germany and Austria, both parties use engagement rings worn on the left hand. At the nuptials, a wedding ring is placed on the right hand, as in several east European nations, including Bulgaria, Poland, and Russia. This can be a new ring for the bride or both, or reusing the engagement rings. Any engagement rings can then remain on the left hand or be transferred to the right hand. In Germany, in has been customary for both the bride and the groom to wear a wedding ring since at least the 1870s[7] and mentions of couples exchange rings during the wedding ceremony in the Netherlands can be found at least as far back as 1815.[8] In Brazil, Mexico and Spain both sexes also wear engagement rings, and the groom's ring often becomes a wedding ring in the nuptial exchange ceremony. In The Netherlands plain bands can be worn on either hand, left for Catholics and right for Protestants. When engaged, both bride and groom wear what will be the wedding band on the opposite hand and switch hands after the wedding.

Compositions and styles
In Western nations, wedding rings are often forged of rose, white, or yellow gold; palladium, platinum, argentium silver, or, more recently, silicone.[9][10] The perpetuity of noble metals symbolizes the permanence of the marriage. Common engravings on the inside of the ring include the name of one's spouse, the names of both spouses, the date of the wedding, and/or a phrase of significance to the spouses.[11] In many nations the engagement rings are plain while the bride's wedding ring commonly is bejeweled.

Some customs include the wedding ring as the final of a series of gifts, which also may include the engagement ring, traditionally given as a betrothal present. This custom was practiced in ancient Rome and is possibly much older.[12]

Religion
Wedding ceremony customs

A groom placing a wedding ring on the finger of his bride during a wedding ceremony
In several traditions, the best man or maid of honour has the duty of keeping track of a couple's wedding rings and to produce them at the symbolic moment of the giving and receiving of the rings during the traditional marriage ceremony. In more elaborate weddings, a ring bearer (who is often part of the family of the bride or groom) may assist in the ceremonial parading of the rings into the ceremony, sometimes on a special cushion.

Among Eastern Orthodox and Eastern Catholic Christians, the exchange of rings is not technically part of the wedding service, but rather are exchanged at the betrothal. It is always a two-ring set given to her by the priest or by the best man.[12] The orthodox Christian Church of Greece has recently stopped performing betrothal blessings separately, as these were often non-committing, and now a betrothal ceremony is the initial part of the wedding service. In many families an informal blessing is now performed by the betrothed ones' parents in a family dinner that formalizes the betrothal. The ceremony of betrothal is now possibly performed immediately before the wedding (or "crowning" as it is more properly called), and the actual symbolic act of marriage is not the exchange of rings, but the crowning.

Historically, the wedding ring was connected to the exchange of valuables at the moment of the wedding rather than a symbol of eternal love and devotion, a sign of "earnest money". According to the 1549 edition of the Book of Common Prayer: after the words 'with this ring I thee wed' follow the words 'This gold and silver I give thee', at which point the groom was supposed to hand a leather purse filled with gold and silver coins to the bride.[13] It is a relic of the times when marriage was a contract between families, not individual lovers. Both families were then eager to ensure the economic safety of the young couple. Sometimes it went as far as being a conditional exchange as this old (and today outdated) German formula shows: 'I give you this ring as a sign of the marriage which has been promised between us, provided your father gives with you a marriage portion of 1000 Reichsthalers' (approximately 20 kg of silver).[13]

Post-wedding customs

A gold banded engagement-wedding-anniversary ring combination welded together.

Byzantine wedding ring, depicting Christ uniting the bride and groom, 7th century, nielloed gold (Musée du Louvre).
Modernly, after marriage the wedding ring is worn on the hand on which it had been placed during the ceremony. By wearing rings on their fourth fingers, married spouses symbolically declare their life-long love for and fidelity to each other. This symbol has public utility, and is presently expected as a matter of tradition and etiquette, so much so that its absence is often interpreted as meaning that the person is single. Many spouses wear their wedding rings day and night. When needed because of hygiene or to avoid damage, they commonly wear their rings on a necklace.

Some cultures exchange additional rings: In some parts of India, Hindu women may wear a toe ring or "bichiya" instead of a finger ring, but the bichiya is increasingly worn in addition to a finger ring. In eastern India, primarily in West Bengal, women wear an iron bangle denominated a "loha". Increasingly, this bangle is plated with gold or silver to improve its appearance. In Romania, spouses celebrate their silver wedding anniversary, i. e., twenty-fifth anniversary, by exchanging silver wedding rings, which are worn on the fourth finger of the left hands along with their original, and usually gold, wedding rings.[14][15]

Wedding ceremonies that use rings
Church of England (Book of Common Prayer of 1662): "With this ring I thee wed, with my body I thee worship, and with all my worldly goods I thee endow: In the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Amen."[16]
Eastern Orthodoxy: In the Eastern Orthodox Service of Betrothal, the priest makes the Sign of the Cross with rings over the bride's head while declaring three times "The servant of God (Groom) is betrothed to the handmaid of God (Bride), in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. Amen". Next, it is declared three times again over the bride's head with the names reversed, after which the rings are exchanged three times, either by the priest or best man. The priest asks God "to bless this putting on of rings with a heavenly blessing and that an Angel of the Lord will go before these Your servants, all the days of their life."[17] In the Eastern Orthodox Church, wedding rings are traditionally worn on the right hand.
Judaism: "You are consecrated to me with this ring according to the law of Moses and Israel." The groom declares this in Hebrew in Orthodox Judaism and both the bride and groom declare it in Reform Judaism.[18]
Roman Catholic Church: "Name., take this ring as a sign of my love and fidelity. In the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit."[19] Because the equality of the spouses is emphasized in the Roman Catholic Sacrament of Marriage, generally the bride and groom each give to the other a wedding ring and recite the above formula in turn.

PLANNING TOOLS
LOCAL VENDORS
WEDDING WEBSITES
REGISTRY
RINGS + DRESSES
PHOTOS
IDEAS & ADVICE
SHOP
SIGN UP
LOG IN
Groom Style By Men's Wearhouse
Planning 101
Guests
Invitations
Songs
Destination Weddings
Honeymoons
Registry
10 Most Famous Engagement Rings in History
We rounded up 10 of our all-time favorite celebrity engagement rings that'll never go out of style.
by The Knot Editors
Marilyn Monroe and Kate Middleton
photo by GETTY IMAGES; CORBIS IMAGES
When it comes to famous engagement rings, there are diamonds, and then there are diamonds (and in Jacqueline Kennedy's case, a diamond and an emerald—surrounded by more diamonds!). From Queen Elizabeth II to Queen Bey, we present to you history's biggest, brightest and most beautiful engagement rings that stand the test of time, plus a few others that are already on their way to being unforgettable. Grab your sunglasses and proceed with caution!

Princess Diana & Kate Middleton: Blue Sapphire With Diamond Halo
Kate Middleton and Princess Diana's engagement ring
photo by CORBIS IMAGES; AP IMAGES
Charles, Prince of Wales, proposed to Lady Diana Spencer in February of 1981, presenting her with an oval-shaped blue sapphire surrounded by a halo of tiny solitaire diamonds on a white gold band. (She chose it herself!) Diana's ring pick reportedly raised some eyebrows since it wasn't custom-made, but rather available for general purchase in Garrard's jewelry collection at the time.
Prince William, Duke of Cambridge, gave his mother's ring to Kate Middleton, Duchess of Cambridge, when he proposed in 2010, keeping the memory of the beloved Princess Diana alive through the ring's stunning beauty and symbolic meaning. Talk about timeless! The deep blue sapphire is just as brilliant on Kate's ring finger as it was on Diana's.

Jacqueline Kennedy: Emerald and Diamond Ring
Jacqueline Kennedy on her wedding day
photo by GETTY IMAGES; AP IMAGES
On June 24, 1953, John F. Kennedy proposed to Jacqueline Bouvier at a restaurant in Boston. And as legendary as the glamorous couple and their tragic story will always be, the unique engagement ring John gave Jackie will never lose its iconic allure. The Van Cleef & Arpels ring boasted a tapered baguette 2.84-carat emerald beside a 2.88-carat diamond with a stunning diamond open-halo setting. Ever the trendsetter, we're sure Jackie made Camelot-era brides-to-be want an emerald-diamond combo on their fingers too. 
Elizabeth Taylor: Giant Emerald-Cut Diamond
Elizabeth Taylor's engagement ring from Mike Todd
photo by GETTY IMAGES
In her lifetime, Elizabeth Taylor married eight times (that's a lot of rings!). But of all the massive baubles in the self-proclaimed jewelry fanatic's trove, one of the most envy-worthy has to be the engagement ring from her third marriage to film and theater producer Mike Todd. He presented her with a 29.4-carat emerald-cut diamond, and the rock is so huge that apparently Taylor adoringly referred to it as her "ice skating rink."
?Marilyn Monroe: Baguette Eternity Band
Marilyn Monroe's engagement ring from Joe DiMaggio
photo by GETTY IMAGES; CORBIS IMAGES
Yankees legend Joe DiMaggio gifted Marilyn Monroe a gorgeous platinum eternity band—complete with 35 baguette-cut diamonds. Well, technically it was her wedding band, since DiMaggio gave it to Monroe on their wedding day on January 14, 1954. And although their union sadly didn't stand the test of time, this ring's understated and simplistic elegance is exactly why the style is still popular today. 
Mia Farrow: Pear-Shaped Diamond
Mia Farrow's engagement ring from Frank Sinatra
photo by AP IMAGES
Mia Farrow received a breathtaking engagement ring mounted with a 9-carat solitaire, pear-shaped diamond from Frank Sinatra in June of 1966. The couple kept their engagement under the radar for about a month, then were married shortly after at a hotel in Las Vegas by a Justice of the Peace. Unfortunately, the marriage lasted only two years, but Farrow's pear-shaped sparkler has remained a staple piece in the lineup of history's iconic engagement rings.
Queen Elizabeth II: Solitaire Diamond Set in Platinum
Queen Elizabeth II's engagement ring
photo by ISTOCK; GETTY IMAGES
Although it may not be Her Majesty's largest piece of jewelry, it's definitely rich in sentimental and symbolic value (and that doesn't mean it's not big enough for the rest of us!). Queen Elizabeth II's ring is a platinum band mounted with a 3-carat solitaire diamond with five smaller diamonds on each side. The ring, which Prince Philip presented to Princess Elizabeth in 1947, is the epitome of understated elegance and class—and as one of the Queen's most frequently worn pieces of jewelry, it has to be.
Beyonce: Emerald-Cut Diamond Set in Platinum
Beyonce's engagement ring from Jay Z
photo by GETTY IMAGES
Does Beyonce's engagement ring from Jay Z remind anyone else of Elizabeth Taylor's from Mike Todd? Bey's 18-carat stunner is a dramatic, emerald-cut diamond by jeweler to the stars Lorraine Schwartz. A classic shape and simple band is made dramatic and bold by the incredible size and sparkle! Nothing but the best for Queen Bey.
Jennifer Aniston: Radiant-Cut Diamond and Yellow Gold Band
Jennifer Aniston's engagement ring from Justin Theroux
photo by SHUTTERSTOCK; GETTY IMAGES
Newlywed Jennifer Aniston's ring from husband Justin Theroux is a massive 8-carat diamond on a yellow gold band. The couple keeps their relationship fairly private, but understandably, the Friends alum has no problem flashing her spectacular rock on the red carpet. 
Kim Kardashian: Cushion-Cut Diamond
Kim Kardashian engagement ring from Kanye West
photo by GETTY IMAGES
Whatever your opinion is of her, can we all agree that the ice on Kim Kardashian's ring finger is almost too amazing? Kanye West proposed to Kardashian in 2013 with a dazzling, 15-carat, cushion-cut sparkler! Kanye reportedly went to great lengths to ensure the ring was produced completely conflict free with the best diamond possible. The result by Lorraine Schwartz is nothing short of spectacular.
Angelina Jolie: Emerald-Cut Diamonds
Angelina Jolie's engagement ring from Brad Pitt
photo by SHUTTERSTOCK; CORBIS IMAGES
When Hollywood power couple Brad Pitt and Angelina Jolie finally tied the knot in 2014, Pitt was in constant cahoots for an entire year with jeweler Robert Procop to design a custom engagement ring perfectly fitted to Jolie's finger. The incredible emerald-cut bauble is elegant yet dramatic, and was definitely worth the wait. 
Engagement RingsRingsGetting EngagedProposal
UP NEXT
Dream engagement rings
30 Dream Engagement Rings
Even if you already have an engagement ring, it's fun to see what's new. Feast your eyes on the latest and greatest sparklers we found.
by The Knot•4 min read
TRENDING
13 Legal Benefits of Marriage
by Ivy Jacobson•7 min read
50+ Date Ideas to Inspire Your Next Date Night
by Elena Donovan Mauer•14 min read
The Ultimate Bridal Shower Game Guide
by Rachel Torgerson•13 min read
Everything You Need to Know About Having an Engagement Party
by The Knot•7 min read
See All
Follow Us
Wedding Ideas + EtiquetteWedding WebsitesRegistryMarketplaceCommunityReal Wedding PhotosWedding Dresses + JewelryWedding InvitationsWedding CakesGroom + GroomsmenWedding on a BudgetRehearsal DinnerThe Knot NewsOur Sponsors
About UsCareersInvestorsMediaAdvertise with UsCheck out our sister sites,GigMasters andVeri
©1997-2018 XO Group Inc.Privacy PolicyTerms of UseSend FeedbackCustomer Service + FAQmade with

30 West 47th Street Ste 502 · New York, NY 10036 | Phone: (212) 398 1256
Grants Jewelry
ENGAGEMENT & WEDDING RINGS
DIAMOND ESSENTIALS
FINE JEWELRY
SERVICES
LATEST FROM THE SHOWROOM
ABOUT
CONTACT

The Biggest & Brightest: History’s Famous Engagement Rings	
April 19, 2017/
Continuing our month-long focus on April’s beloved birthstone, the diamond, it’s no secret that the media (both today and in days past) loves a good love story.  So when a celeb engagement makes the news, everyone waits with baited breath to see “THE” ring.  (We’re guilty too – just last week we showed you John Cena’s proposal video & shared a photo of Nikki’s ring!)

You won’t find current celebrity rings on this list though – these rings were worn by women who will be remembered as icons in their time.  So, in no particular order, take a look at some of the most famous engagement rings in history.


Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis

Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis’ Ring from JFK
This ring is truly one of a kind – an extravagant yellow gold ring that boasts a 2.88 carat diamond and a 2.84 emerald flanked by tapered baguettes. After the wedding, the ring was remounted to replace the baguettes with round brilliant and marquise cut diamonds, totaling 2.12 carats. The ring’s estimated value is now $1.39 million.


Audrey Hepburn

Audrey Hepburn’s Rings from Mel Ferrer
Hepburn is the epitome of style – setting trends well before we recognized them as such. In 1954 Mel Ferrer gave her THREE engagement rings – white gold, rose gold and yellow gold, each with a small but perfectly formed diamond. Audrey wore the rings stacked together – now stacked rings are recognized style!


Marilyn Monroe

Marilyn Monroe’s Ring from Joe DiMaggio
It makes sense that Marilyn’s engagement ring is as iconic as she is. Gifted to the late actress by fiancé Joe DiMaggio, the simple and elegant band is packed with 35 baguette-cut diamonds all the way around. The ring was auctioned off in 1999 for $772,500.


Queen Elizabeth II

Queen Elizabeth II’s ring from Prince Philip
Queen Elizabeth II’s ring is a platinum band mounted with a 3-carat solitaire diamond with five smaller diamonds on each side. The ring, which Prince Philip presented to Princess Elizabeth in 1947, is the epitome of understated elegance and class—and as one of the Queen’s most frequently worn pieces of jewelry, it has to be.


Grace Kelly

Grace Kelly’s ring from Prince Rainier III
Grace Kelly’s emerald-cut ring is the definition of elegance.  The sparkling rock, while more than 10 carats, is a simple shape that stands the test of time. The center diamond is flanked between two subtle, baguette-cut diamonds.  Their love story is a true fairy tale, so it is only fitting that the ring be memorable, however the Prince originally proposed with a much more modest ring.  He upgraded when he realized that other actresses of Kelly’s caliber were wearing much less modest rings.


Princess Diana & Kate Middleton

Princess Diana (from Prince Charles) & Kate Middleton (from Prince William)
Princess Diana’s oval, sapphire engagement ring, which now belongs to Kate Middleton is easily one of history’s most iconic pieces of jewelry. The 12-carat sapphire features 14 surrounding solitaire diamonds. After Diana’s death in 1997, the ring was passed on to Prince William, who proposed to Middleton with it in 2010.  There have been many Diana inspired rings, although it is rumored that Kate asked that the ring no longer be imitated once she agreed to wear it.


Priscilla Presley

Priscilla Presley’s ring from The King
Elvis Presley proposed to Priscilla with a three-and-a-half-carat diamond ring, with 20 surrounding, detachable diamonds, from Memphis jeweler Harry Levitch.  36 years later, Nicholas Cage gave Priscilla’s daughter an impressive sparkling 10+ Carat Diamond Bulgari Engagement Ring, however Cage and Lisa Marie were married for less than four months.


Mia Farrow

Mia Farrow’s ring from Frank Sinatra
Mia Farrow received a breathtaking engagement ring mounted with a 9-carat solitaire, pear-shaped diamond from Frank Sinatra in June of 1966. Their marriage only lasted 2 years, but the ring will never be forgotten.


Elizabeth Taylor

Elizabeth Taylor’s ring from Richard Burton
Taylor was married eight times, and collected some magnificent jewelry along the way.  Of all her engagements, the ring from Richard Burton is the largest – he gave her a 33-carat (!!!) diamond ring. This ‘Krupp diamond’ was so unique and gorgeous the name was later changed to the ‘Elizabeth Taylor Diamond.’

Does one of these jaw-dropping rings strike a chord with you? These and other famous rings are frequently used as inspiration for custom engagement ring design. Maybe it’s the shape of the diamond.  Or the setting.  Take that feature that inspires you and let Susan help you create the icon for your own love story.  Get started here.  Or take a moment to browse our gallery of engagement rings – most are named for the beauty who inspired their creation – for further inspiration.

Still coming in the diamond spotlight this month, we’ll discuss Colored Fancy Diamonds and Synthetic Diamonds.

 Interested in more stories like this?  Join Us On Social Media. 



We send periodic email announcements and a monthly newsletter with clips to our favorite News & Events stories.  Subscribe today.

First name: *
Last name: *
Email: *
Type the text shown: *CAPTCHA image
* These fields are required.

Share this entry
You might also like


Custom Jewelry Design


Precious Metal Colors Grants Jewelry


0
REPLIES
Leave a Reply
Want to join the discussion? 
Feel free to contribute!


Name *

Email *

Website

Save my name, email, and website in this browser for the next time I comment.

 Grants Jewelry Logo Watermark Light Grey
BROWSE
Latest Arrivals
Diamond Essentials
Fine Jewelry
Earrings
Necklaces
Rings
Pendants
SERVICES
Appraisals
Custom Design
Diamond Education
Restoration, Repairs & Cleaning
Diamond & Jewelry Consultation
SEARCH

Search products…
Search
CONTACT INFO
Address
Grants Jewelry
30 West 47th Street Suite 502
New York, NY 10036

Phone
 (212) 398-1256

Email
 susan@grantsjewelry.com

© 2017 - Created for Grants Jewelry by Maximum Effort
The World’s Most Valuable Easter Eggs	
	Diamonds: A Smartphone’s Best Friend?
