LOUISVILLE, Ky. — Since 1882, when the Standard Oil Trust was formed, Franklin D. Roosevelt was born and the electrical age began with the flip of a switch that lit up one square mile of Lower Manhattan, no horse has won the Kentucky Derby without racing at the age of 2.

The horse that did it way back then was the chestnut gelding Apollo, named after the Greek god of many things, including the paradoxical powers to both heal and plague. He caught the favorite Runnymede in deep stretch to win by a half-length and earn the heaping sum of $4,560. No one in attendance that day could have predicted how long it would take for another 3-year-old to emerge who did not race at age 2 but would still sniff the roses on the first Saturday in May.

Enter Justify, the undefeated chestnut colt with the big white blaze who had won three straight races in 2018 and is trained by the Triple Crown-winning Bob Baffert. Maybe the curse of Apollo would get the best of him at the Kentucky Derby, or maybe enough was enough, and the right horse had finally come along to send that curse the way of the billy goat and the Bambino.

Newsletter Sign UpContinue reading the main story
Sports Newsletter
Get our most ambitious projects, stories and analysis delivered to your inbox every week.

SEE SAMPLE PRIVACY POLICY OPT OUT OR CONTACT US ANYTIME
And on Saturday at Churchill Downs, amid a steady and driving rain, Justify proved he was indeed that horse, fending off Good Magic to win the 144th Kentucky Derby by two and a half lengths in 2 minutes 4.20 seconds, and putting his name right next to Apollo’s in racing lore. Justify also earned a $1,432,000 paycheck for his jockey, trainer and owners, and rewarded his thoroughly soaked backers with $7.80 on a $2 bet to win. Audible finished third.

“I’ve seen all kinds, I mean this guy, he’s just special,” Baffert said. “He has that presence about him.”

Continue reading the main story
It was an emphatic statement coming from a trainer who, in 2015, won the first Triple Crown in 37 years with American Pharoah and who also presided over the world’s richest racehorse, Arrogate.

Saturday’s result, which came in slop that made the race itself more unpredictable, marked the sixth year in a row that the favorite had won the Derby. It was also Baffert’s fifth Derby victory.

Photo

The rain made a mess of the track and the jockeys on Saturday. Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times
He said it did not bother him that 136 years had gone by without a horse unraced at 2 winning the Derby. What did unnerve him a bit, he acknowledged, was that his wife, Jill, chose to wear a green dress on Saturday. In racing, he said, green is thought to be bad luck.

“She pulled it out,’’ he said. “I didn’t say anything. I thought, all right, we’re going to see how good this horse is.”

Justify was ridden by Mike Smith, the 52-year-old ironman who is in supreme shape and, in a career overflowing with success, not surprisingly goes by the nickname Big Money Mike. His other Derby triumph came in 2005 when he scored with the 50-1 shot Giacomo, and this time the challenge was to guide his supremely talented, but woefully inexperienced, mount to victory in a jammed 20-horse field.

Which he did, becoming the second-oldest jockey to win the Derby, behind Bill Shoemaker, who was 54 in 1986 when he won on Ferdinand. “Keep riding horses like this, and you don’t have to work that hard,’’ said a jubilant Smith. “They take care of all the work for you.’’

Photo

A spectator protected her hat from the rain. Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times
Justify broke cleanly out of the starting gate — a necessity according to Baffert — and quickly headed to the front of the pack. Promises Fulfilled went to the lead, but Justify never let him get away. In the backstretch, Smith let him relax a bit, but once he asked for Justify’s best around the far turn, the horse responded like a freight train. “Supercharged,” is how Baffert described it.

Chad Brown, trainer of Good Magic, said he was proud of his horse but was unlikely to take another shot at Justify when the Preakness Stakes, the second leg of the Triple Crown, is held two weeks from now.

Justify is co-owned by WinStar Farm, Head of Plains Partners, Starlight Racing and the China Horse Club. WinStar, which won its first Derby when Super Saver romped in the slop in 2010, owns the majority of the horse, and its president and chief executive, Elliott Walden, decided to name him Justify at the suggestion of an assistant. There’s no story, he said, just a good name for a good horse.

The horse’s large ownership group reflects the rise of partnerships across the industry, even among the sport’s most powerful owners. In all, nine of the 20 Derby horses this year were owned by partnerships.

Photo

It was the second Derby win for jockey Mike Smith. His first win was in 2005 aboard Giacomo. Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times
As for the other owners, Head of Plains Partners is run by the hedge fund executive Sol Kumin, who earned his first Kentucky Oaks victory on Friday, when Monomoy Girl netted the first-place check for another of his successful partnerships, Monomoy Stables.

Starlight Racing, a small syndicate run by Jack Wolf and his wife, Laurie, usually invests in unproven yearlings, not 3-year-olds. But the trend to team up, Wolf said, is here to stay.

And then there’s the fourth owner, China Horse Club, the exclusive and secretive group that has become a major global player in the sport in just five years. It won the Oaks last year with Abel Tasman and then one-upped itself with Justify.

“The win today is equivalent to a gold medal in the Olympics,’’ said Teo Ah Khing, the Harvard-educated architect who runs the China Horse Club. Sitting beside him at the postrace news conference was the prime minister of the Caribbean island of St. Lucia, where Teo is attempting to develop a horse racing resort in a place where there are no thoroughbreds.

Photo

Having endured a long day of rain, race fans made their way out of Churchill Downs. Credit Christian Hansen for The New York Times
But truly standing out among all the owners was Kumin, who had scored a double, snaring both the Oaks and the Derby in one weekend, the first time any owner had done that in more than 60 years.

When Kumin won the Oaks on Friday, he maintained that nothing could top it. “This feels about as good as it gets,’’ he insisted.

But then came Saturday, and Justify’s triumph. Surely, Kumin now felt differently. After all, his philosophy on teaming with others to buy horses is this: Why buy one when you can buy two? So why win one big race when you can win two?

And perhaps the same will also hold true for Baffert in 2018. Why settle for one Triple Crown when perhaps Justify can bring you another?


Kentucky Derby
Grade I race
Kentucky Derby.svg
Derby.jpg
The Most Exciting Two Minutes in Sports;
The Run for the Roses
Location	Churchill Downs
Louisville, Kentucky, U.S.
Inaugurated	1875
Race type	Thoroughbred
Website	www.kentuckyderby.com
Race information
Distance	1 1⁄4 miles (10 furlongs; 2,012 m)
Record	1:?59 2⁄5, Secretariat (1973)
Surface	Dirt
Track	Left-handed
Qualification	3-year-old
Weight	Colt/Gelding: 126 lbs (57.2 kg)
Filly: 121 lb (55 kg)
Purse	US$2 million
1st: $1,425,000
Bonuses	US$ 200
The Kentucky Derby /?d??rbi/, is a horse race that is held annually in Louisville, Kentucky, United States, on the first Saturday in May, capping the two-week-long Kentucky Derby Festival. The race is a Grade I stakes race for three-year-old Thoroughbreds at a distance of one and a quarter miles (2 km) at Churchill Downs. Colts and geldings carry 126 pounds (57 kilograms) and fillies 121 pounds (55 kilograms).[1]

The race is often called "The Run for the Roses" for the blanket of roses draped over the winner. It is also known in the United States as "The Most Exciting Two Minutes In Sports" or "The Fastest Two Minutes in Sports" in reference to its approximate duration. It is the first leg of the American Triple Crown and is followed by the Preakness Stakes, then the Belmont Stakes. Unlike the Preakness and Belmont Stakes, which took hiatuses in 1891–1893 and 1911–1912, respectively, the Kentucky Derby has been run every consecutive year since 1875, even during both World Wars. A horse must win all three races to win the Triple Crown.[2] In the 2015 listing of the International Federation of Horseracing Authorities (IFHA), the Kentucky Derby tied with the Whitney Handicap as the top Grade 1 race in the United States outside the Breeders' Cup races.[3]

The attendance at the Kentucky Derby ranks first in North America and usually surpasses the attendance of all other stakes races including the Preakness Stakes, Belmont Stakes, and the Breeders' Cup.[4]

Contents 
1	History
1.1	Attendance
1.2	Sponsorship
2	Traditions
2.1	Riders Up!
2.2	Festival
3	Records
4	Winners
5	See also
6	Footnotes
7	Further reading
8	External links
History

This section needs additional citations for verification. Please help improve this article by adding citations to reliable sources. Unsourced material may be challenged and removed. (May 2018) (Learn how and when to remove this template message)
In 1872, Col. Meriwether Lewis Clark, Jr., grandson of William Clark of the Lewis and Clark expedition, traveled to England, visiting Epsom in Surrey where The Derby had been running annually since 1780.[5] From there, Clark went on to Paris, France, where in 1863, a group of racing enthusiasts had formed the French Jockey Club and had organized the Grand Prix de Paris at Longchamp, which at the time was the greatest race in France.


A thoroughbred horse is depicted on the reverse of the Kentucky state quarter
Returning home to Kentucky, Clark organized the Louisville Jockey Club for the purpose of raising money to build quality racing facilities just outside the city. The track would soon become known as Churchill Downs, named for John and Henry Churchill, who provided the land for the racetrack.[6] Officially, the racetrack was incorporated as Churchill Downs in 1937.[7]

The Kentucky Derby was first run at 1 1/2 miles (12 furlongs; 2.4 km) the same distance as the Epsom Derby. The distance was changed in 1896 to its current 1 1/4 miles (10 furlongs; 2 km). On May 17, 1875, in front of an estimated crowd of 10,000 people, a field of 15 three-year-old horses contested the first Derby. Under jockey Oliver Lewis, a colt named Aristides, who was trained by future Hall of Famer Ansel Williamson, won the inaugural Derby. Later that year, Lewis rode Aristides to a second-place finish in the Belmont Stakes.

Although the first race meeting proved a success, the track ran into financial difficulties and in 1894 the New Louisville Jockey Club was incorporated with new capitalization and improved facilities. Despite this, the business floundered until 1902 when Col. Matt Winn of Louisville put together a syndicate of businessmen to acquire the facility. Under Winn, Churchill Downs prospered and the Kentucky Derby then became the preeminent stakes race for three-year-old thoroughbred horses in North America.

Thoroughbred owners began sending their successful Derby horses to compete later in the Preakness Stakes at the Pimlico Race Course, in Baltimore, Maryland, followed by the Belmont Stakes in Elmont, New York. The three races offered large purses and in 1919 Sir Barton became the first horse to win all three races. However, the term Triple Crown didn't come into use for another eleven years. In 1930, when Gallant Fox became the second horse to win all three races, sportswriter Charles Hatton brought the phrase into American usage. Fueled by the media, public interest in the possibility of a "superhorse" that could win the Triple Crown began in the weeks leading up to the Derby. Two years after the term was coined, the race, which had been run in mid-May since inception, was changed to the first Saturday in May to allow for a specific schedule for the Triple Crown races. Since 1931, the order of Triple Crown races has been the Kentucky Derby first, followed by the Preakness Stakes and then the Belmont Stakes. Prior to 1931, eleven times the Preakness was run before the Derby. On May 12, 1917 and again on May 13, 1922, the Preakness and the Derby were run on the same day. On eleven occasions the Belmont Stakes was run before the Preakness Stakes.


Churchill Downs in 1901
On May 16, 1925, the first live radio broadcast of the Kentucky Derby was originated by WHAS and was also carried by WGN in Chicago.[8] On May 7, 1949, the first television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, produced by WAVE-TV, the NBC affiliate in Louisville. This coverage was aired live in the Louisville market and sent to NBC as a kinescope newsreel recording for national broadcast. On May 3, 1952, the first national television coverage of the Kentucky Derby took place, aired from then-CBS affiliate WHAS-TV.[9] In 1954, the purse exceeded $100,000 for the first time. In 1968, Dancer's Image became the first (and to this day the only) horse to win the race and then be disqualified after traces of phenylbutazone, an analgesic and anti-inflammatory drug, were found in the horse's urinalysis; Forward Pass won after a protracted legal battle by the owners of Dancer's Image (which they lost). Forward Pass thus became the eighth winner for Calumet Farm. Unexpectedly, the regulations at Kentucky thoroughbred race tracks were changed some years later, allowing horses to run on phenylbutazone. In 1970, Diane Crump became the first female jockey to ride in the Derby, finishing 15th aboard Fathom.[10]

The fastest time ever run in the Derby was set in 1973 at 1:59.4 minutes when Secretariat broke the record set by Northern Dancer in 1964. Not only has Secretariat's record time yet to be topped, in the race itself, he did something unique in Triple Crown races: each successive quarter, his times were faster. Though times for non-winners were not recorded, in 1973 Sham finished second, two and a half lengths behind Secretariat in the same race. Using the thoroughbred racing convention of one length equaling one-fifth of a second to calculate Sham's time, he also finished in under two minutes. Another sub-two-minute finish, only the third, was set in 2001 by Monarchos at 1:59.97.[11]

In 2005, the purse distribution for the Derby was changed, so that horses finishing fifth would henceforth receive a share of the purse; previously only the first four finishers did so.[12]

Attendance
Since the Kentucky Derby is the biggest race in the world, millions of people from around the world bet at various live tracks and online sportsbooks.[13] In 2017, a crowd of 158,070 watched Always Dreaming win the Derby, making it the seventh biggest attendance in the history of the racetrack. The track reported a wagering total of $209.2 million from all the sources on all the races on the Kentucky Derby Day program. It was a 9 percent increase compared to the total of $192.6 million in 2016 and an increase of 8 percent over the previous record set in 2015 of $194.3 million.[14] TwinSpires, a platform for betting online and a partner of the Kentucky Derby and the Breeders' Cup, recorded $32.8 million in handle on the Churchill Down races for the Kentucky Derby Day program. This was a 22 percent increase over the preceding year. On the Kentucky Derby race alone, the handle of TwinSpires was $20.1 million, which is a 22 percent rise compared to the prior year.[15]

The race often draws celebrities. HM Queen Elizabeth II, on a visit to the United States, joined the racegoers at Churchill Downs in 2007.[16]

Sponsorship
The 2004 Derby marked the first time that jockeys—as a result of a court order—were allowed to wear corporate advertising logos on their clothing.[17][18]

Norman Adams has been the designer of the Kentucky Derby Logo since 2002. On February 1, 2006, the Louisville-based fast-food company Yum! Brands, Inc. announced a corporate sponsorship deal to call the race "The Kentucky Derby presented by Yum! Brands."[19] In 2018, Woodford Reserve replaced Yum Brands as the presenting sponsor.[20]

Traditions
In addition to the race itself, a number of traditions play a large role in the Derby atmosphere. The mint julep—an iced drink consisting of bourbon, mint, and a sugar syrup—is the traditional beverage of the race. The historic drink can be served in an ice-frosted silver julep cup, but most Churchill Downs patrons sip theirs from souvenir glasses (first offered in 1939 and available in revised form each year since) printed with all previous Derby winners.[21] Also, burgoo, a thick stew of beef, chicken, pork, and vegetables, is a popular Kentucky dish served at the Derby.[citation needed]


Louisville Clock (often called the Louisville Derby Clock)
The infield—a spectator area inside the track—offers general admission prices but little chance of seeing much of the race, particularly prior to the jumbotron installation in 2014.[22][23] Instead, revelers show up in the infield to party with abandon. By contrast, "Millionaire's Row" refers to the expensive box seats that attract the rich, the famous and the well-connected. Women appear in fine outfits lavishly accessorized with large, elaborate hats. Following the Call to the Post, as the horses are paraded before the grandstands, the University of Louisville Cardinal Marching Band plays Stephen Foster's "My Old Kentucky Home," a tradition which began in 1921.[24] The event attracts spectators from a large area, flying in hundreds of private aircraft to Louisville International Airport.[25]

The Derby is frequently referred to as "The Run for the Roses," because a lush blanket of 554 red roses is awarded to the Kentucky Derby winner each year. The tradition originated in 1883 when New York socialite E. Berry Wall presented roses to ladies at a post-Derby party that was attended by Churchill Downs founder and president, Col. M. Lewis Clark. This gesture is believed to have led Clark to the idea of making the rose the race's official flower. However, it was not until 1896 that any recorded account referred to roses being draped on the Derby winner. The Governor of Kentucky awards the garland and the Kentucky Derby Trophy. Pop vocalist Dan Fogelberg composed the song "Run for the Roses" which was released in time for the 1980 running of the race.[26]

Riders Up!
“Riders Up!” is the traditional command from the Paddock Judge for jockeys to mount their horses in advance of the upcoming race. Since 2012, it was recited by a dignitary or celebrity attendee.

Festival
Main article: Kentucky Derby Festival
In the weeks preceding the race, numerous activities are held for the Kentucky Derby Festival. Thunder Over Louisville—an airshow and fireworks display—generally begins the festivities in earnest two weeks prior to the Derby.

This page is a list of horse and pony breeds, and also includes terms for types of horse that are not breeds but are commonly mistaken for breeds. While there is no scientifically accepted definition of the term "breed",[1] a breed is defined generally as having distinct true-breeding characteristics over a number of generations. Its members may be called "purebred". In most cases, bloodlines of horse breeds are recorded with a breed registry. The concept is somewhat flexible in horses, as open stud books are created for developing horse breeds that are not yet fully true-breeding.

Registries also are considered the authority as to whether a given breed is listed as a "horse" or a "pony". There are also a number of "color breed", sport horse, and gaited horse registries for horses with various phenotypes or other traits, which admit any animal fitting a given set of physical characteristics, even if there is little or no evidence of the trait being a true-breeding characteristic. Other recording entities or specialty organizations may recognize horses from multiple breeds, thus, for the purposes of this article, such animals are classified as a "type" rather than a "breed".

The breeds and types listed here are those that already have a Wikipedia article. For a more extensive list, see the List of all horse breeds in DAD-IS.

For additional information, see horse breed, horse breeding, and the individual articles listed below. Additional articles may be listed under Category:Horse breeds and Category:Types of horse.



Contents 
1	Horse breeds
1.1	A–C
1.2	D-K
1.3	L-R
1.4	S-Z
2	Pony breeds
2.1	A-K
2.2	L-Z
3	Color "breeds"
4	Types of horse
4.1	Modern types
4.2	Archaic types
5	Extinct subspecies and breeds
5.1	Extinct subspecies
5.2	Early prototypes
5.3	Extinct breeds
6	See also
7	References
8	External links
Horse breeds
Main article: Horse
Horses are members of Equus ferus caballus that generally mature to be 14.2 hands (58 inches (150 cm)) or taller, but many breed registries do accept animals under this height and classify them as "horses," as horse characteristics include factors other than height. For the purposes of this page, if a breed registry or stud book classifies the breed as a horse, it is listed here as a horse, even if some representatives are pony-sized or have some pony characteristics. Pony breeds are listed in the next section, below.

A–C
Abaco Barb, see Barb horse
Abtenauer
Abyssinian, see Ethiopian horses
Aegidienberger
Akhal-Teke
Albanian horse
Altai horse
Altèr Real, see Lusitano
American Albino
American Cream Draft
American Indian Horse
American Paint Horse
American Quarter Horse
American Saddlebred
American Warmblood
Andalusian horse
Andravida horse
Anglo-Arabian
Anglo-Arabo-Sardo, see Sardinian Anglo-Arab
Anglo-Kabarda
Appaloosa
AraAppaloosa
Arabian horse
Ardennes horse
Arenberg-Nordkirchen
Argentine Criollo
Asturcón
Augeron
Asian wild horse, see Przewalski's horse
Assateague horse,see Chincoteague pony
Australian Brumby, see Brumby
Australian Draught Horse
Australian Stock Horse
Austrian Warmblood
Auvergne horse
Auxois
Azerbaijan horse
Azteca horse
Baise horse,
Bale, see Ethiopian horses
Balearic horse, see Mallorquín and Menorquín
Balikun horse
Baluchi horse
Banker horse
Barb horse
Bardigiano
Bashkir Curly, see Curly horse
Basque mountain horse
Bavarian Warmblood
Belgian horse
Belgian Warmblood (includes Belgian Half-blood)
Bhutia Horse, also Bhotia, Bhote ghoda, Bhutan, Bhutani, Bhutua
Black Forest Horse, also called Black Forest cold blood
Blazer horse
Boerperd
Borana, see Ethiopian horses
Bosnian Mountain Horse
Boulonnais horse
Brabant, see Belgian horse
Brandenburger
Brazilian Sport Horse (Brasileiro de Hipismo)
Breton horse, or Trait Breton
Brumby
Budyonny horse or Budenny
Burguete horse
Burmese Horse
Byelorussian Harness horse
Calabrese horse
Camargue horse
Camarillo White Horse
Campeiro
Campolina
Canadian horse
Canadian Pacer
Carolina Marsh Tacky
Carthusian horse, see Andalusian horse
Caspian horse
Castilian horse, see Andalusian horse
Castillonnais
Catria horse
Cavallo Romano della Maremma Laziale
Cerbat Mustang
Chickasaw Horse, see Florida Cracker Horse
Chilean horse also known as Chilean Corralero
Choctaw horse
Cleveland Bay
Clydesdale horse
Cob, see Types of Horse, below
Colonial Spanish Horse, see Types of Horse, below
Colorado Ranger
Coldblood trotter
Comtois horse
Corsican horse
Costa Rican Saddle Horse
Cretan horse, see Messara horse
Criollo horse, also spelled Crioulo
Croatian Coldblood
Cuban Criollo
Cumberland Island horse
Curly Horse
Czech warm blood
D-K
Daliboz, see Azerbaijan horse
Danish Warmblood
Danube Delta horse
Dole Gudbrandsdal, also called Dole,
or Dølahest
Don, see Russian Don
Dongola horse
Draft Trotter, also called Light Dole, Dole Trotter, see Coldblood trotter
Dutch harness horse
Dutch Heavy Draft
Dutch Warmblood
Dzungarian horse, see Przewalski's horse
East Bulgarian
East Friesian horse, see Ostfriesen and Alt-Oldenburger
Estonian Draft
Estonian horse
Falabella
Faroese or Faroe horse, see Faroe pony in pony section
Finnhorse, or Finnish Horse
Fleuve
Fjord horse also called Norwegian Fjord Horse
Florida Cracker Horse
Foutanké or Fouta
Frederiksborg horse
Freiberger
French Trotter
Friesian cross (includes Friesian Sport Horses)
Friesian horse
Friesian Sporthorse (a type of Friesian cross)
Furioso-North Star
Galiceno or Galiceño
Galician Pony (Caballo de pura raza Gallega)
Gelderland horse
Georgian Grande Horse
German Warmblood or ZfDP, see Types section, below
Giara Horse
Gidran
Groningen Horse
Gypsy horse, sometimes called "Gypsy Vanner," "Vanner Horse," "Gypsy Cob," and "Coloured Cob"
Hackney horse
Haflinger
Hanoverian horse
Heck horse
Heihe horse
Henson horse
Hequ horse
Hirzai
Hispano-Bretón
Hispano-Árabe also known as Hispano or Spanish Anglo-Arab
Holsteiner horse
Horro, see Ethiopian horses
Hungarian Warmblood
Icelandic horse
Iomud
Irish Draught, also spelled Irish Draft
Irish Sport Horse sometimes called Irish Hunter
Italian Heavy Draft
Italian Trotter
Jaca Navarra
Jeju horse
Jutland horse
Kabarda horse, also known as Kabardian or Kabardin
Kafa, see Ethiopian horses
Kaimanawa horses
Kalmyk horse
Karabair
Karabakh horse also known as Azer At
Karossier see Ostfriesen and Alt-Oldenburger
Karachai horse
Kathiawari
Kazakh Horse
Kentucky Mountain Saddle Horse
Kiger Mustang
Kinsky horse
Kyrgyz Horse
Kisber Felver
Kiso Horse
Kladruber
Knabstrupper
Konik
Kundudo, see Ethiopian horses
Kustanair
L-R
Latvian horse
Lipizzan or Lipizzaner
Lithuanian Heavy Draught
Lokai
Losino horse
Lusitano
Lyngshest, see Nordlandshest/ Lyngshest
M'Bayar
M'Par
Malopolski
Mallorquín
Mangalarga
Mangalarga Marchador
Maremmano
Marismeño horse
Marsh Tacky, see Carolina Marsh Tacky
Marwari horse
Mecklenburger
Me?imurje horse
Menorquín
Mérens horse
Messara horse
Mez?hegyesi sport-horse (sportló), or
Mez?hegyes felver, see Hungarian Warmblood
Metis Trotter, see Russian Trotter
Miniature horse
Misaki horse
Missouri Fox Trotter
Monchina
Mongolian Horse
Mongolian Wild Horse, see Przewalski's horse
Monterufolino
Morab
Morgan horse
Mountain Pleasure Horse
Moyle horse
Muraközi, Murakoz, or Muraközi ló, see Me?imurje horse
Murgese
Mustang horse
Namib Desert Horse
Nangchen horse
National Show Horse
Nez Perce Horse
Nivernais horse
Nokota horse
Noma, see Noma pony, in Pony section
Nonius horse
Nooitgedachter
Nordlandshest/ Lyngshest
Noriker horse, also called Pinzgauer
Norman Cob
Norsk Kaldblodstraver (Norwegian coldblood trotter), see Coldblood trotter
North American Single-Footer horse
North Swedish Horse
Norwegian Fjord, see Fjord horse
Novokirghiz
Oberlander Horse
Ogaden, see Ethiopian horses
Oldenburg horse, also spelled Oldenburgh, Oldenburger
Orlov trotter
Ostfriesen and Alt-Oldenburger
Paint, see American Paint Horse
Pampa horse
Paso Fino
Pentro horse
Percheron
Persano horse
Peruvian Paso, sometimes called Peruvian Stepping Horse
Pintabian
Pleven horse
Poitevin horse also called Mulassier
Posavac horse
Pottok
Pryor Mountain Mustang
Przewalski's horse, a species, not a "breed"
Pura Raza Española or PRE, see Andalusian horse
Purosangue Orientale
Qatgani
Quarab
Quarter Horse, see American Quarter Horse
Racking horse
Retuerta horse
Rhenish German Coldblood also known as Rhineland Heavy Draft
Rhinelander horse
Riwoche horse
Rocky Mountain Horse
Romanian Sporthorse
Rottaler, see Heavy warmblood
Russian Don
Russian Heavy Draft
Russian Trotter
S-Z
Saddlebred, see American Saddlebred
Salerno horse
Samolaco horse
San Fratello horse
Santa Cruz Island horse
Sarcidano horse
Sardinian Anglo-Arab, also known as Sardinian Horse
Schleswig Coldblood
Schwarzwälder Kaltblut, see Black Forest Horse
Selale, see Ethiopian horses
Sella Italiano
Selle Français
Senner
Shagya Arabian
Shan Horse or Shan Myinn
Shire horse
Siciliano indigeno
Silesian horse
Sorraia
Sokolsky horse
South German Coldblood also known as Süddeutsches Kaltblut
Soviet Heavy Draft
Spanish Barb see Barb horse
Spanish Jennet Horse, modern, not to be confused with the historic Jennet or Spanish Jennet (see Archaic types, below)
Spanish Mustang
Spanish-Norman horse
Spanish Tarpan, see Sorraia
Spiti Horse
Spotted Saddle horse
Standardbred horse
Suffolk Punch
Svensk Kallblodstravare (Swedish coldblood trotter), see Coldblood trotter
Swedish Ardennes
Swedish Warmblood
Swiss Warmblood
Taish? horse
Takhi, see Przewalski's horse
Tawleed
Tchernomor, see Budyonny horse
Tennessee Walking Horse
Tersk horse
Thoroughbred
Tinker horse, see Gypsy horse
Tiger Horse
Tolfetano
Tori horse
Trait Du Nord
Trakehner
Tsushima, see Taish? horse
Tuigpaard, see Dutch harness horse
Ukrainian Riding Horse
Unmol Horse
Uzunyayla
Ventasso horse (Cavallo Del Ventasso)
Virginia highlander
Vlaamperd
Vladimir Heavy Draft
Vyatka, see pony section
Waler horse, also known as Waler or Australian
Waler
Walkaloosa
Warmblood, see "Types of horse" below, or
individual warmblood breed articles
Warlander
Welsh Cob (Section D), see Welsh pony
Westphalian horse
Wielkopolski
Württemberger or Württemberg
Xilingol horse
Yakutian horse
Yili horse
Yonaguni horse
Zaniskari
Zweibrücker
?emaitukas, also known as Zemaituka, Zhumd,
Zhemaichu, or Zhmudk, see Pony section.
Pony breeds
Main article: Pony
Ponies are typically classified as members of Equus caballus that mature at less than 14.2 hands (58 inches, 147 cm). However, some pony breeds may occasionally have individuals who mature over 14.2 but retain all other breed characteristics. Also, some organizations use a different measurement cutoff to distinguish horses and ponies. There are some breeds once classified as ponies that now frequently mature over 14.2 hands due to modern nutrition and management, yet retain the historic classification. For the purposes of this list, if a breed registry classifies the breed as a "pony," it is listed here as such, even if some individuals have horse characteristics. Otherwise, where there is a dispute as to "horse" or "pony" status of a breed, "horse" is the default.

(Because of this designation by the preference of a given breed registry, most miniature horse breeds are listed as "horses," not ponies.)

A-K
American Shetland, see Shetland pony
American Walking Pony
Anadolu pony, also called Anadolu Ati
Ariegeois Pony, see Mérens horse in horse section
Assateague Pony, see Chincoteague Pony
Asturian pony, see Asturcon in horse section
Australian Pony
Australian Riding Pony
Bali Pony
Bashkir Pony
Basque Pony, see Pottok
Basuto pony, also spelled Basotho pony
Batak Pony
Bhutia Pony, see Bhutia Horse and Indian Country Bred
Bosnian Pony
British Riding Pony, see Riding Pony in "types of horse" section
British Spotted Pony
Burmese Pony
Carpathian Pony, see Hucul Pony
Canadian rustic pony
Caspian pony, see Caspian horse
Chincoteague Pony
Chinese Guoxia
Coffin Bay Pony
Connemara pony
Czechoslovakian Small Riding Pony
Dales Pony
Danish Sport Pony
Dartmoor pony
Deli pony
Deutsches Reitpony, see German Riding Pony
Dülmen Pony
Eriskay pony
Esperia Pony
Exmoor pony
Falabella, see Falabella in horse section
Faroe pony
Fell Pony
Flores pony, see Timor Pony
French Saddle Pony
Galician Pony
Garrano
Gayoe
German Riding Pony, also called Deutsche Reitpony
or Weser-Ems Pony
German Classic Pony, see Shetland pony
Gotland Pony
Guizhou pony
Guangxi, see Baise horse
G?o-xìa pony, see Chinese Guoxia
Hackney pony
Highland Pony, see also Garron
Hokkaido Pony
Hucul Pony, also called Hu?ul Pony
Hunter Pony, see "types of horse" section
Icelandic pony, see Icelandic horse in horse section
Indian Country Bred
Java Pony
Kerry bog pony
L-Z
Landais Pony
Lijiang pony
Lundy Pony
Manipuri Pony
Merens Pony, see Ariegeois pony
Miniature horse, see horse section
Miyako Pony
Narym Pony
New Forest Pony
Newfoundland pony
Noma pony
Northlands Pony, see Nordlandshest in the horse section
Ob pony also called Priob pony
Peneia Pony
Petiso Argentino
Pindos Pony
Poney Mousseye
Pony of the Americas
Quarter pony
Riding Pony, see "types of
horses" section
Sable Island Pony
Sandalwood Pony
Sardinian Pony, see Sardinian horse
Shetland pony
Skogsruss, see Gotland Pony
Skyros Pony
Spiti Pony, see Spiti Horse
Sumba and Sumbawa Pony
Tibetan Pony
Timor Pony
Tokara Pony
Virginia highlander, see horse section
Vyatka horse
Welara
Welsh pony
Welsh mountain pony (Section A), see
Welsh Pony
Welsh pony (Section B), see Welsh Pony
Welsh pony of cob type (Section C),
see Welsh Pony
Western Sudan pony
Yakut Pony, see Yakutian horse
Yonaguni, see horse section
Zaniskari, see horse section
?emaitukas, also known as Zemaituka,
Zhumd, Zhemaichu, or Zhmudka
Color "breeds"
Main article: Color breed
There are some registries that accept horses (and sometimes ponies and mules) of almost any breed or type for registration. Color is either the only criterion for registration or the primary criterion. These are called "color breeds," because unlike "true" horse breeds, there are few other physical requirements, nor is the stud book limited in any fashion. As a general rule, the color also does not always breed on (in some cases due to genetic impossibility), and offspring without the stated color are usually not eligible for recording with the color breed registry. There are breeds that have color that usually breeds "true" as well as distinctive physical characteristics and a limited stud book. These horses are true breeds that have a preferred color, not color breeds, and include the Friesian horse, the Cleveland Bay, the Appaloosa, and the American Paint Horse.

The best-known "color breed" registries that accept horses from many different breeds are for the following colors:

Buckskin (horse), a color which cannot breed "true" due to the cream gene which creates it being an incomplete dominant
Palomino, a color which cannot breed "true" due to the cream gene which creates it being an incomplete dominant
Pinto horse
White (horse). Some of these animals are registered in the United States with the American creme and white horse registry, which was once called an "Albino" registry until it was understood that true albino does not exist in horses. (see White (horse) and Dominant white for details)
Types of horse
See also: Category:Types of horse
A "type" of horse is not a breed but is used here to categorize groups of horses or horse breeds that are similar in appearance (phenotype) or use. A type usually has no breed registry, and often encompasses several breeds. However, in some nations, particularly in Europe, there is a recording method or means of studbook selection for certain types to allow them to be licensed for breeding. Horses of a given type may be registered as one of several different recognized breeds, or a grouping may include horses that are of no particular pedigree but meet a certain standard of appearance or use.

Modern types
AQPS ("Autre Que Pur-Sang"), French designation for riding horses "other than Thoroughbred," usually referring to the Anglo-Arabian, Selle Français and other Thoroughbred crosses. There is a registry for AQPS horses in France.
Baroque horse, includes heavily muscled, powerful, yet agile Classical dressage breeds such as the Lipizzaner, Friesian, Andalusian, and Lusitano.
Canadian Cutting Horse - any cutting horse in Canada, most of American Quarter Horse bloodlines
Cob (horse), a body type of small, sturdy, compact and powerful riding horse with a number of breeds and partbreds falling onto the classification
Colonial Spanish Horse, the original Jennet-type horse brought to North America, now with a number of modern descendants with various breed names.
Draft horse or Draught horse
Feral horse, a horse living in the wild, but descended from once-domesticated ancestors. Most "wild" horses today are actually feral. The only true wild (never domesticated) horse in the world today is the Przewalski's horse.
Gaited horse, includes a number of breeds with a hereditary intermediate speed four-beat ambling gait, including the Tennessee Walker, Paso Fino, and many others.
Galloway, a term used in Australia to collectively refer to show horses over 14 hands but under 15 hands.
German Warmblood or ZfDP, collective term for any of the various warmblood horses of Germany, of which some may be registered with the nationwide German Horse Breeding Society (ZfDP).
Grade horse, a horse of unknown or mixed breed parentage.
Hack, a basic riding horse, particularly in the UK, also includes Show hack horses used in competition.
Heavy warmblood, heavy carriage and riding horses, predecessors to the modern warmbloods, several old-style breeds still in existence today.
Hunter, a type of jumping horse, either a show hunter or a field hunter
Hunter pony, a show hunter or show jumping animal under 14.2 hands, may be actually of a horse or pony breed, height determines category of competition.
Iberian horse, encompassing horse and pony breeds developed in the Iberian peninsula, including the Andalusian, Lusitano and others.
Indian Half-bred, a half-blood type from India
Mountain and moorland pony breeds, abbreviated "M&M," a specific group of pony breeds native to the British Isles.
New Zealand Warmblood, a developing warmblood type based on Hanoverian and KWPF breeding.
Oriental horse, the "hot-blooded" breeds originating in the Middle East, such as the Arabian, Akhal-Teke, Barb, and Turkoman horse
Part-Arabian, a variety of breeds and crossbreeds with a significant amount of documentable Arabian blood, but not pure Arab.
Polo pony, a horse used in the sport of polo, not actually a pony, usually a full-sized horse, often a Thoroughbred.
Riding horse or saddle horse; interchangeable terms for a wide variety of horses bred primarily for suitability as riding animals as opposed to draft or harness work.
Riding Pony, a term of art used in the United Kingdom for specific types of show ponies.
Sport horse or Sporthorse, includes any breeds suitable for use in assorted international competitive disciplines governed by the FEI.
Stock horse, agile, heavily muscled riding horses of several different breeds, suitable for working cattle. Not to be confused with the breed Australian Stock Horse. Some representatives colloquially called "cow horse" or "cow pony" in the western United States.
Warmblood, a group of Sport horse breeds developed for modern Dressage and other Olympic disciplines, including the Dutch Warmblood, Hanoverian horse, Swedish Warmblood, Westphalian horse, etc.
Windsor Grey, the gray carriage horses of British Royalty.
ZfDP, see German Warmblood, above.
Archaic types
See also: Horses in Warfare and Horses in the Middle Ages
Prior to approximately the 13th century, few pedigrees were written down, and horses were classified by physical type or use. Thus, many terms for Horses in the Middle Ages did not refer to breeds as we know them today, but rather described appearance or purpose. These terms included:

Charger, see Courser (horse)
Courser (horse)
Destrier or "Great Horse"
Hobby, see Irish Hobby
Jennet, sometimes called Spanish Jennet
Palfrey
Rouncey
Steppe horse, refers to various domesticated horse and wild horse species, particularly those from Siberia and other parts of western Asia
Extinct subspecies and breeds
These members of equus ferus either were a recognized, distinct breed of horse that no longer exists as such, or subspecies that have become extinct at some point since domestication of the horse. This section does not include any species within evolution of the horse prior to modern Equus ferus caballus.

Extinct subspecies
Tarpan
Early prototypes
Main article: History of horse domestication theories
Before the availability of DNA techniques to resolve the questions related to the domestication of the horse, various hypotheses were proposed. One classification was based on body types and conformation, suggesting the presence of four basic prototypes, labeled the "Tarpan", "Forest horse", Draft and "Oriental", each of which was hypothesized to have adapted to their environment prior to domestication.[2] However, more recent studies suggest that all domesticated horses originated from a single wild species and that the different body types of horses were entirely a result of selective breeding after domestication,[3] or possibly landrace adaptation.

Extinct breeds
These were human-developed breeds which no longer exist.

Anglo-Norman horse
Angevin horse
Berrichon horse
Bidet horse
Cape Horse, see Boerperd
Chapman horse, see Cleveland Bay, into which it developed
Charentais horse, or Vendéen
Charolais horse
Cheval du Morvan
Ferghana horse
Galloway pony
Karacabey horse
Irish Hobby
Jennet, or Spanish Jennet
Mazury horse
Narragansett Pacer
Navarrin horse
Neapolitan horse
Nisean horse
Norfolk Trotter, also called the Norfolk Roadster, Yorkshire Trotter or Yorkshire Roadster
Öland horse
Old English Black horse
Pozan
Tundra Horse, the probable ancestor of the Yakutian horse.
Turkoman Horse also known as Turkemene. The Akhal-Teke may be a direct descendant.
Yorkshire Coach Horse
